---
layout: page
title: "Web Services"
---

So far we've been dealing with the world as it exists on our individual computers.
But a lot of exciting problems arise in the context of having multiple machines
work together on something. We'll get a taste of such approaches in the upcoming
week, starting today with the basic question of how to obtain and process data
from web servers. Our goal is to build a simple query interface for
<a href="http://www.flickr.com">Flickr</a>; we'll cover how to send and process
queries, and how to use a graphical user interface (GUI) to provide a somewhat
nicer interface than we have been.

We'll be using a number of different Java packages to help out. As usual, Oracle
provides a detailed reference. Somewhat more useful to get going, they also
provide a set of <a href="http://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/index.html">Java tutorials</a>.
I've provided links to relevant ones within the menu below. Note that they cover
much more than we do, and are just provided for your reference in case you want
supplementary reading.

## Outline
{:.no_toc}

* Outline
{:toc}

All the code files for today:
[FlickrSearchCore.java](resources/FlickrSearchCore.java) |
[FlickrSearch.java](resources/FlickrSearch.java) |
[ProcessXML.java](resources/ProcessXML.java) |
[WWWGet.java](resources/WWWGet.java) |
[WWWGetTry.java](resources/WWWGetTry.java) |
[flickr-dart.xml](resources/flickr-dart.xml)

## Graphical user interface

> Java tutorials on <a href="http://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/uiswing">Swing</a>

Let's start by mocking up a little GUI for the photo browser we have in
mind:[FlickrSearchCore.java](resources/FlickrSearchCore.java). GUI construction
is tedious, and best done with a GUI development environment that lets us graphically
lay out the various components. So we'll just do something simple that illustrates
the use of some of the components (buttons, a text field, a combo box); once
you've seen these, you can pick up the rest by following the same principles.

We've gotten away from our good old DrawingFrame, and rolled all the GUI functionality
directly here. Thus the class extends JFrame, a Java class for a top-level window.
The constructor creates a "canvas" as a JComponent (generic GUI component) with a
method to paint itself. In this method we have to call the superclass paintComponent,
and then can do whatever drawing we want to. That will eventually be to display
an image, but it's blank for now. Then there's a bunch of boilerplate to set the
size, pack the GUI components, make it visible, etc. If you look back at DrawingFrame,
you'll see all that stuff in there.

The other GUI elements are created in a separate method setupGUI(). First we have
a "next" button and a "previous" button that step through the photo array (much
like we did in our original slideshow application). It shouldn't surprise you that
the way the buttons handle presses is through events. Here they are "action" events,
and we add an ActionListener that defines an actionPerformed() method.

Next is a combo box (a drop-down menu) that allows selection of how the photos
should be sorted &mdash; relevance, date, or interestingness (ascending or descending).
This component likewise has an action event in which we note the selected sort order.
The construction is a little tricky, as we have to specify the options to put in the
list. I'm using a hard-coded list of Strings.

The textbox for the search text is simple, and the search button is set up the
same way as the other buttons. Its action is somewhat more complex, as it invokes
our search function loadImages() and has to catch some of the errors it might encounter.

The key thing we have to account for with multiple components is how to lay them
out. (That's what's best done graphically.) Java provides a number of different
layout managers with different behaviors. We put the buttons in their panel with
a "flow layout" that just adds them in rows, left to right, with a new row started
when the next component won't fit in the current row. We then put that panel along
with the canvas into the main content panel with a "border layout" that allows the
user to put one thing at the top (NORTH), one at the bottom (SOUTH), one on the
right side (EAST), one on the left side (WEST), and one in the middle (CENTER).
The CENTER expands to occupy all space not used by the other four. So the button
panel is at the top and the canvas in the center, taking the rest of the space.

## Getting stuff from the web

> Java tutorials on <a href="http://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/essential/io">IO</a>, <a href="http://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/essential/exceptions">exceptions</a>

At its heart, network programming is (in my opinion) all about how to properly
transfer information between computers. As we discussed briefly when we first
encountered type declarations in Java, a computer only ever deals with bits, so
how is any particular set of 0s and 1s to be interpreted? What does an incoming
bunch of bits imply, and how do I send the appropriate outgoing bunch of bits?
That's what network <em>protocols</em> are all about. With the internet, there
are multiple layers of how to handle bits, to gain increasing reliability (in case
of misread bits, dropped bits or entire messages, etc.). You'll have to take the
networking course to get into that; here we're just going to look at a high level,
provided by web-based protocols.

A key component of the web is HTTP, the HyperText Transfer Protocol, which is a
set of rules for how browsers (and other agents on your machine) communicate with
web servers. For example, your browser might ask the Dartmouth web server
"`get /~reg/index.html`"; and then the web server responds with the
hypertext for that page. Your browser would then notice that there are some images
referenced in there, and ask the server for them. **[Demonstrated in class, with
"curl -i" on my machine, and "tail -f /net/weblogs/access_log" on the CS webserver]**
Note that the basic process is <em>stateless</em> (doesn't remember you from one
request to the next). Cookies, anyone?

The URL (Uniform Resource Locator) is the global identity of the page you want;
e.g. `http://www.dartmouth.edu/~reg/index.html`

* `http` &mdash; the protocol (how to obtain the document)
* `www.dartmouth.edu` &mdash; the hostname (which machine has it)
* `~reg/` &mdash; the path (where on that machine the document is)
* `index.html` &mdash; the file name (if absent, often assumed to be index.html or index.php)

Java provides libraries that let us get stuff from a web server, within a program.
Here's a little self-referential program that gets this page.

[\[WWWGet.java\]](resources/WWWGet.java)

```java
import java.net.*;
import java.io.*;

public class WWWGet {

  public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
    // Open a stream reader for processing the response from the URL
    URL url = new URL("https://traviswp.github.io/cs10/lectures/6/6.html");
    System.out.println("*** getting " + url);
    BufferedReader in = new BufferedReader(new InputStreamReader(url.openStream()));

    // Read lines from the stream
    String line;
    while ((line = in.readLine()) != null) {
      System.out.println(line);
    }
    in.close();

    System.out.println("*** done");
  }

}
```

We see a couple new Java things here. The first is the Reader/Stream mechanism
for reading data. We create a new InputStreamReader that will get its input from
the web server's response for the URL we provide. We also package that reader up
in a BufferedReader so that we can get lines of text at a time, rather than just
individual characters. The Java I/O machinery is quite powerful, but this is
sufficient for now.

The "while" loop is a bit funky. It has the usual structure of
"while (condition) { do something; }", but what's with the condition? This is a
canonical way of writing the condition for I/O in C-like languages, actually
combining a statement "in=readline()" to get the next line, with a test
"thatLine != null" to see whether there was a line, or whether we reached the
end of the file.

There are lots of ways that I/O can fail. Java has an extensive Exception
machinery to handle failures. I've swept that under the rug so far, but now it's
time to start taking it on. When an exception is thrown the program stops what
it was doing and goes into error-handling mode. Exceptions are either <em>caught</em>
and handled in the method that throws them or passed on to the method that called
it. If that method does not catch the exception it is passed to the method that
calls it, etc. If the main program does not catch the exception it kills the program
and prints an error message. You probably have seen these messages for null
pointers or subscript out of bounds.

Exceptions are an excellent way of passing an error on to a method that knows a
reasonable way to handle them. Exceptions usually occur in a low-level method.
Consider trying to open a file and failing. The file-opening method has no idea
what the programmer wants to do if the file can't be opened. Maybe the method
that calls it has no idea, either. If you don't know a good way to handle the
exception it is best to pass it on. Eventually you will get to a high-level
method that does know what to do about the situation. If the file name was just
entered by the user it might be good to give her a second chance. Or it may be
that the programmer has a backup file to use if the first cannot be opened. Or
it could be that the right thing to do is to print an error message and quit the
program. Exceptions give a way to let the low-level method that discovers the
problem pass it on to a method that knows what to do about it.

In the example above, we simply passed the buck. And really, there's not much
more we could intelligently do for such a simple example. But the simple example
provides an opportunity to illustrate the mechanism for catching exceptions, so
that then we can use that later (soon) when there is a reasonable alternative.
The basic idea is to wrap a "try"/"catch" around code that might throw an exception.
The "catch" specifies the type of exception it can handle (and a name for a
parameter holding the exception data &mdash; it's just an object) and the code to
perform when that exception is thrown. We can also follow the "try" with a "finally"
that has code to be executed whether the code in the "try" block succeeds or
fails. It is used to clean up. A typical example is an open file that should be closed.

An exception-handling version of our previous buck-passing program: [WWWGetTry.java](resources/WWWGetTry.java).
The handlers for the exceptions from creating the URL and the reader are at the
bottom. We then have a try-within-a-try for reading (boy would Yoda be displeased),
because we want to close the stream no matter what. Note that the stream closing
itself can throw an exception, which is handled by the same catcher as for
opening. Whew.

## Web services

Instead of dealing with web pages, we'll be dealing with web services &mdash;
when information is delivered via this same machinery. In that case, we actively
engage with the server, sending it values of parameters with the input, and getting
back results specific to that input. It's like a function call (and indeed some
of the mechanisms make it feel even more that way). We'll be using a basic, but
powerful and common mechanism, called REST (REpresentational State Transfer)
that is built directly on top of the same HTTP approach we've just used for web
pages.

For example, here's a greeting program using REST:

[https://traviswp.github.io/cs10/code/hello.php?name=Travis](https://traviswp.github.io/cs10/code/hello.php?name=Travis)

This is just a URL, extended with a parameter "name" whose value here is "Travis"
(try substituting your own name, of course). Multiple such parameters can be
included, separated by ampersands (&amp;); e.g.,

[https://traviswp.github.io/cs10/code/hello.php?name=Travis&color=Blue](https://traviswp.github.io/cs10/code/hello.php?name=Travis&color=Blue).

This approach directly uses the "GET" machinery already in place for fetching web
pages. I'm sure you've seen parameters showing up in URLs in other contexts; can
you think of a few? A more powerful, but somewhat more complicated, approach is
to leverage the "POST" machinery that is commonly used when sending form data
(e.g., when ordering something from a web store). Rather than including the
name/value pairs in the URL, they are sent directly afterwards via an established
connection. We'll stick with the simpler "GET" approach.

One thing to note is that not all characters are acceptable in a URL. For example,
URLs aren't supposed to include spaces. So we have to "URL encode" the parameter
values using an encoding of such "special characters". A simple way to do that is
with the URLEncoder class:

```java
URL url = new URL("https://traviswp.github.io/cs10/code/hello.php?name="
         + URLEncoder.encode("Travis Peters", "UTF-8"));
```

## Processing XML

> Java tutorials on <a href="http://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/jaxp">JAXP</a>, particularly <a href="http://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/jaxp/dom">DOM</a>

So now we've handled sending parameters to a web service; how do we get a response
back that we can interpret? There are a number of approaches to encoding data in
a way that a program could interpret it. One standard way is XML (eXtensible Markup
Language), which is related to and much like HTML (HyperText Markup Language) in
that they are both languages (sets of syntax and grammar rules) describing how to
represent something. For HTML, that's hypertext; for XML, it's basically anything.

XML represents data by wrapping it with <em>tags</em> that give some meaning to
each piece. The tags can be nested, with the inner parts being components of the
outer parts. A tag can also have a set of name-value <em>attributes</em> that give
particular details (without going to the trouble of nesting them, since they're
unique). A simple example:

```xml
<enrollment>
    <course department="CS" number="1" term="12F">
        <student name="Alice" year="13" />
        <student name="Bob" year="15" />
        <student name="Charlie" year="13" />
    </course>
    <course department="CS" number="10" term="12F">
        <student name="Delilah" year="12" />
        <student name="Elvis" year="14" />
        <student name="Flora" year="14" />
    </course>
</enrollment>
```

Note that tags are enclosed with angle brackets (&lt; ... &gt;) and must come in
properly nested pairs (start tag &lt;name&gt; ... end tag &lt;/name&gt;;). A start
tag can include attributes. If there's nothing to be nested inside an element,
the tag can be <em>self-closing</em>, with a slash at the end of the start tag:
&lt;name/&gt;.

To do something with XML, we have to know how to interpret the tags and what their
relationships are to each other. That's obviously problem-specific. We're focusing
here on a Flickr-based photo search application. We'll give Flickr a query describing
the photos we're interested in, and it will return information about the photos
that meet our criteria. The
<a href="http://www.flickr.com/services/api/">Flickr API documentation</a> describes
the format for different types of queries; we're doing a standard
<a href="http://www.flickr.com/services/api/explore/flickr.photos.search">photo search</a>
here.

Fortunately the XML is pretty simple. An example (from a search for Dartmouth
images, of course): [flickr-dart.xml](resources/flickr-dart.xml). Actually,
that's a hand-edited version of what Flickr gave back, as the original included
an ampersand in "Dev &amp; The Cataracs", which is a no-no in XML. It caused me
some pain when writing code to process this, and as you'll see, I just did something
simple (aka "gross hack") to deal with it.

So what can we do with XML? For our application, we want to actually pull down
the images (we could also label them with their titles, etc., but I'll leave that
for you to do on your own, if you're so interested). The
<a href="http://www.flickr.com/services/api/misc.urls.html">Flickr URL documentation</a>
says that we can access a photo with a URL of this form:

```
http://farm{farm-id}.staticflickr.com/{server-id}/{id}_{secret}.jpg
```

So for example, the fourth image in our XML file (Baker) has this URL:
<a href="http://farm3.staticflickr.com/2622/3840099142_fb08d49e3a.jpg">http://farm3.staticflickr.com/2622/3840099142_fb08d49e3a.jpg</a>.

Let's write a program to pull the URLs from the XML file. We need an ability to
read the XML file into a representation we can handle with a program. Java provides
numerous XML parsing libraries. Here I'll use the document object model (DOM)
approach, in which we directly build a document structure mirroring the nested
structure in the XML file. (If you ever explore your HTML through a power-user
tool on your browser, that's the same idea.) The DOM gives us the ability to
search for elements with a specific tag name and get their attributes (among
many other things; e.g., navigating the nesting structure). So we can find the
photos and build the URLs from the attributes as illustrated above.

The code: [ProcessXML.java](resources/ProcessXML.java). Save
[flickr-dart.xml](resources/flickr-dart.xml) in a folder called "inputs". We
start by pulling the XML file into one big String. We read the individual lines,
using the same approach we've seen before, and concatenate them together. Along
the way, we replace ampersands with pluses, the gross hack I mentioned. Then
there's quite a bit of boilerplate to parse the XML string, due to the power
and generality of the mechanism. Finally, we piece together the URLs for the
photo elements as described. I had to write an extra little piece of code to
look up the attribute of a given name and return its value, just by marching
down the list of attributes and seeing which one matches.

## The finished product

[FlickrSearch.java](resources/FlickrSearch.java) puts together all the pieces
we've seen, with just a bit more to drive the search.

The meat of the application is loadImages, which works basically the same way as
our ProcessXML.java code, wrapped up in code to construct and execute the query
(one such query returned the XML we used directly there) and fetch images from
the URLs in the XML.

The query specifies the various parameters to the REST query, as specified in
the <a href="http://www.flickr.com/services/api/explore/flickr.photos.search">photo search</a>
docs on Flickr (note that you can test out the search interactively there).
Here we use the textbox input as the value of "text" (properly URL encoded),
provide the specified sort as the value of "sort", and limit the results to 10.
To run this yourself, you'll need an API key for Flickr (as given in a final
variable). I have obtained one for use in the class and have provided it on Canvas.
Please limit your usage of this application to simple and appropriate searches,
so that I may maintain my key. If you want to do more extensive searches yourself,
it's easy to apply for a key.

We form the image URLs using the technique we already discussed; the "z" at the
end of the URLs indicates an image that is max 640 pixels on a side. We then use
the standard Java image mechanism to pull in the images and store them in an array.

## Java notes

<dl>
<dt>while</dt>
<dd>The Java while-loop is pretty standard: "while (condition) { statements; }" &mdash; test the condition, and if it's true do the statements and repeat.</dd>

<dt>try/catch/finally</dt>
<dd>Exception-handling machinery is introduced in more detail in the body of the notes. This is the syntax for wrapping up some code that might throw an <code>Exception</code>.</dd>

<dt>throws</dt>
<dd>This annotation on a function indicates that it can pass up an exception to its caller (which then must handle it or pass it on).</dd>
</dl>
