---
layout: page
title: "Introduction"
---

## Outline
{:.no_toc}

* Outline
{:toc}

All the files for today:
[DrawingFrame.java](resources/DrawingFrame.java),
[Smile.java](resources/Smile.java),
[Smile2.java](resources/Smile2.java),
[Smile3.java](resources/Smile3.java),
[smiley.png](resources/smiley.png),
[smiley2.jpg](resources/smiley2.jpg)

## What's this course about?

"Problem solving via object oriented programming."  Examples of problems from
your experience?  In this class: process images, search
social networks, play games, compress files, identify
clusters in data sets, solve puzzles like Sudoku, play the Kevin Bacon
game on a movie database....

While those are fun (I hope), the goal of the course is to develop
expertise in core programming techniques useful throughout computer
science, including representation, abstraction, recursion and
modularity, and concurrency.  One of the most important
themes in this course is abstraction:

* Identify a pattern or interaction (computational or otherwise).
* Give it a name.
* Define its interface (i.e., describe inputs/outputs and their relationships to each other)

Proper abstraction allows us to treat complex ideas as "black boxes"
so that we can reason about their behavior about without knowing their
exact contents.  For instance, we can abstract the notion of square
root, giving a black box into which we feed a number and from which we
receive that number's square root.  We don't care what's inside the
black box, as long as it preserves the input/output relationship; we
could use Newton's method or another algorithm, a look-up table, or some
combination.

You use abstraction when you drive an automobile. Do you really know what happens
when you step on the accelerator? Lots of parts do their thing: accelerator cable,
fuel injector, cylinders, pistons, cams, drive shaft, transmission, universal joint,
and all under computer control. But to you, the driver, you rely on the abstraction
 &quot;step on accelerator, car moves.&quot;

The same analogy applies to standard interchangeable parts (a big
revolution in military and industrial technology).  Lots of different
pieces, but with standard connections and cables, so you can hook them
up as you please.  Similarly with computers &mdash; USB ports, video
output, headphone mini-jacks, etc.

In order to define our abstractions, we need to have a kind of
notation for describing them.  Ideally, we want a notation that can be
read by the computer as well as by humans.  In this class we will use
the object-oriented (OO) language Java.  Simula, a simulation language,
was the first OO language.  The idea is to express a simulation (or
other problem) in terms of interacting objects.  Sometimes those objects model things
in the world, like the wildebeasts that stampeded in <em>The Lion King</em>.
It would be too complex to try to control them all directly, so they created an object
for each wildebeast that contained rules for
how to interact with  other wildebeasts and with the environment.  They started them
up and let them interact.  They thus simulated wildebeast behavior and
interaction and put it onto film.

Often objects are more abstract.  But they usually have:

* Some data or information that they "know".
* Some actions that they can perform when asked (methods), usually involving the data that they hold.

Objects are a good way to perform abstraction.  If the data
is private (which is usually the case in Java), the only way to
interact with it is through the methods.  The methods become
an interface between the data and the world.  The exact way that
the data is stored becomes invisible to the outside world, so it
can be changed without breaking anything.

Look back at the examples above — what are the types of data and actions?

This ability is important, because as we will see there are often
a number of different data structures that can be used to represent
the data, each with its advantages and drawbacks. In this class we
will spend a lot of time looking at:

* Abstract Data Types (ADTs). In spite of the name, these are
      collections of operations.  Some, like lists, sets, dictionaries,
      maps, stacks, queues, priority queues, graphs, etc. have become
      somewhat standardized because they are widely applicable.  We
      will look at a number of these abstractions.

* Data Structures.  These are concrete ways of representing
      data.  Some examples are arrays, linked lists, binary search
      trees, and hash tables.  We will look at all of these. We
      will see that an array can be used to implement most of the
      ADTs listed above, but for some (e.g. sets) they are much slower
      than other choices.  We will look at the tradeoffs of choosing
      one data structure or another to implement each ADT.

The idea of "data abstraction" came from a 1972 paper by Parnass entitled,
["On the Criteria To Be Used in Decomposing Systems Into Modules"](resources/criteria.pdf)
He compared two approaches for decomposing a program to create a KWIC (Key Words in Context) Index
into modules.  The first was the standard way at the time, which was to break the program down
into sequential steps (e.g. Input, Shift, Alphabetize, Output).  The other broke it by giving
a module to each type of data (e.g. Line Storage).  He showed that changing how a type of data was
represented required changing every module in the first decomposition, but only required
changing a single module in the second.

## Administrative stuff

See [https://traviswp.github.io/cs10/](https://traviswp.github.io/cs10/) for
some stuff to look at now:

* Who, when, where
* Requirements: homework (short assignments, problem sets), programming drills, exams
* Collaboration policies (please <span style="font-weight:bold;color:#c00000">follow the honor code</span>)
* Schedule and lecture notes
* Instructions for installing course software
* Java info
* Other generally helpful information

Also, we'll be using Canvas as the main organizational point for the course.

We have an x-hour Thursday!

Note that [SA0](../../sa/sa0/sa0.html) is out (due Wednesday), just to take care of the preliminaries.
Please pay special attention to what we are asking you to do regarding recitation
section sign-up.

You can get my planned schedule for the course by clicking the Schedule link on any of
the course web pages. As I put up the lecture notes for each lecture, a link to the notes
will go live.

Lecture notes are there to help you, to keep you from having to
write down and type in a lot of stuff that we go over in class.
However, they aren't necessarily complete, and they're also simple,
sometimes terse, not necessarily grammatical, etc.  They're my working
notes, and are not intended to take the place of the lectures or the
readings. *Lecture notes are not always complete. I always reserve the right to
cover material in lecture that was not in the online lecture notes.*

I will provide source code for the programs we go through in class, but in many
cases much of the class will be spent interactively building them up (or tearing
them apart). The best way to learn the material is by doing it (that's why we have
homework!), and I will try to simulate that process as best I can within the
time constraints and so forth.

Other CS 10 instructors (Tom Cormen, Scot Drysdale, and Chris Bailey-Kellogg) have
written most of our notes, though I've modified them here and there for our purposes.
Additions, corrections, and suggestions are welcome, and will improve the notes for
this and future classes.

## Getting started

You all know a programming language. For most of you it is Python.
For some of you it is Java, Matlab, or C.  Learning a second programming language
is much easier than learning a second natural language like English.
The first hundred pages in the book go over what we will use in Java
rather formally with a lot of detail.  The Oracle site has even more. The on-line
text introduces Java in a more conversational, interactive way.

Lectures are an awful way to communicate such detail. I expect you to read these
sections and come to me or course staff, or post on Piazza, with questions. In
lecture I will try to give you a framework on which to hang the details, and a
way of approaching and thinking about the language, driven by problem-solving applications.

### Course software

The [course software page](../../software.html) has all of the gory details about
how to get your development environment all setup for the course.

**NOTE:** Eclipse is a powerful IDE, and supplies all sorts of help like code completion
(you type a variable name and a dot and it shows you all of the variables and methods
in the object referred to by that variable, with templates describing the parameters
of methods) and refactoring (reorganizing your code - e.g renaming a variable,
where only the references in the current scope are changed).  Unlike Python and
its interpreter, if you want to run a command you have to write a program to do
it.

Spend some time playing in Eclipse. Check out the menus, practice making a few
projects, adding code, and running it. We will use Eclipse *a lot* this term so
the sooner you feel comfortable in this IDE the better.

### Some simple Java

We will use the remaining class time to walk through some simple example applications,
to get acquainted with Java programming and Eclipse.

Our textual smiley program [Smile.java](resources/Smile.java) simply prints out a
nice little smiley face (feel free to make it fancier). So the main type of data
we're dealing with is the character string, and the operation is to write it out.
This all gets wrapped up in some fairly standard Java boilerplate that you'll see/write
again and again (and Eclipse helps you write). Eclipse compiles and runs the program,
and handles the output to the console.

Now let's take our first step towards dealing with image data, with [Smile2.java](resources/Smile2.java).
To run this example yourself, you will have to save [smiley.png](resources/smiley.png) in your project,
within a folder named "pictures". There's also a helper class, [DrawingFrame.java](resources/DrawingFrame.java)
that was created to package up some of the details of creating a very simple GUI;
save it in the same folder as Smile2.java (but no need to read it yet).

So we use the DrawingFrame as a way to open up a file containing an image and
display it in a new window. In so doing, we see a bit more Java detail, namely
that it's all about objects. We create a new DrawingFrame object, giving it some
info for its initialization (a window title and a filename). We store that new
object in a variable "gui" (though we never use it in this piece of code — the GUI
goes off and does its own thing). There's a new bunch of boilerplate surrounding
this (SwingUtilities stuff), which is there so that the GUI can act independently,
responding to mouse presses, etc.

Going one step further, add another image [smiley2.jpg](resources/smiley2.jpg) to
the "pictures" folder, and give [Smile3.java](resources/Smile3.java) a whirl.
Select one of the windows (give it the keyboard focus, e.g., by clicking on it with
your mouse), and hit a key.

Now we've defined our own class and created objects of it! In the main method, we
create two different smiley objects. As before "new" creates an object, now of
our own class, "Smile3". The objects are initialized by calling a method ("constructor")
of the same name as the class. (This is like __init__ for you Python people.)
The parameter values (e.g., "Choice A") are passed to the constructor, where they
may be used in initializing the object.

Each Smile3 object has two "instance variables": "name" and "numVotes". These are
declared before the methods — a template for what data will be stored in an object.
Python people are used to objects having instance variables (though not declaring them);
C people can think of them kind of like structs (though as we'll see, they're much more
powerful). Each object has its own copies of the instance variables — smileyA has a
name and a numVotes that are different from those of smileyB (as they should be!).
Thus when we call `smileyA.vote()`, only its tally is incremented, and an appropriate
message is printed.

Note that the constructor has a parameter called "name", which could be confused
with the instance variable "name". Specifying "this.name" in the body of the
constructor indicates that we want the instance variable (just like "self" for Python
people). But when there's no confusion, we can leave off the "this." and just give
the name of the instance variable (as with "numVotes" in the constructor).

The code to detect and respond to key presses is pretty funky looking, but don't
worry about it for now; we'll dive into that in a couple classes. Just note that
it calls the `vote()` method, which is where we increment the tally and print a message.

## Java notes

<dl>

<dt>class definition</dt>
<dd>Java is organized around classes, which provide a blueprint for how to organize objects (aka "instances") in terms of data and methods. The name of the class (e.g., "Smile") should match the name of the file ("Smile.java").</dd>

<dt>method definition</dt>
<dd>A method performs an operation for an object. It is defined inside the class, and at its heart include a name, list of parameters (names and types), and return type (before the name), followed by a body, which is a code block to be executed.</dd>

<dt>public static void main(String args[])</dt>
<dd>This is a special method name and type signature telling Java where to begin execution of the program &mdash; it is the main method. We'll be ignoring the args parameter in this course.</dd>

<dt>syntax characters</dt>
<dd>Note that Java uses curly braces, { and }, to mark blocks of code, bodies of classes, etc. Basically wherever you would indent in Python, you also put curly braces in Java (indendation is then optional, but strongly recommended for readability). Each individual statement (not curly braces) is ended with a semicolon. </dd>

<dt>output</dt>
<dd>System.out handles the basic (console-based) output. One method on System.out is named println, and it prints a string and then forces a newline. Eclipse trick: type "syso" and then hit control-space to complete it to that long phrase, and save some typing. (Eclipse has a bunch of such shortcuts.) There's also System.err which can be used similarly for error messages.</dd>

<dt>String type</dt>
<dd>A string just holds a bunch of characters. Strings hard-coded in the program are enclosed in double quotes "...". Strings support many operations, including concatenation (gluing together) with +, and many types will "automatically" produce a string representation of themselves in that context.</dd>

<dt>method invocation</dt>
<dd>To ask "object" to perform "method" with "parameters" (comma separated values), we write "object.method(parameters);".</dd>

<dt>import</dt>
<dd>Lots of additional functionality is provided by extra packages; the "import" statement says to use them and the classes they define.</dd>

<dt>variable declaration</dt>
<dd>Every variable has a type. That's true in any language &mdash; it tells the machine how a bunch of 0s and 1s should be interpreted. But in many compiled languages like Java (and C, C++, etc.) that type must be specified in the source code, while in many interpreted languages like Python and Matlab, it is just maintained at run-time. (Some nice languages are able to infer the type at compile time, and kind of have the best of both worlds.) </dd>

<dt>variable assignment</dt>
<dd>The equals sign is used to assign a value (right-hand side) to a variable (left-hand). That can be done at the same time as the variable is declared, and then again later.</dd>

<dt>object creation</dt>
<dd>An instance of a class, an object, is created by the "new" operator, with the name of the class and any parameters needed to initialize the object.

  The new operator does three things:

  1. It allocates memory for the object.
  2. It runs a constructor on the object being created.
  3. It returns the address of the object in memory. We call this address a reference to the object.
</dd>

<dt>comments</dt>
<dd>Multi-line comments start with /* and end with */; single-line comments are marked with //. Comments beginning with /** are used to automatically generate HTML-based program documentation &mdash; javadocs.</dd>

<dt>instance variables / fields</dt>
<dd>These store data specific to an object; they are declared outside any method.</dd>

<dt>visibility (public/private/protected)</dt>
<dd>This part of a declaration says who has access: public (any other method has access), private (only the object's methods), or protected (subclasses can too; a point we'll see later). </dd>

<dt>constructor</dt>
<dd>Creating an object creates its instance variables. Java will initialize these (to 0 for numbers, false for boolean, null for references to objects). However, these are seldom what we want. Java provides a special type of method called a constructor, that has the same name as the class. It called via "new", and is reponsible for giving all of the instance variables appropriate values. It can take parameters, too.</dd>

<dt>return type</dt>
<dd>If a method is to return a value, the type of that value is specified. If doesn't return a value, "void" is indicated as the return type.</dd>

<dt>increment</dt>
<dd>The increment operator adds 1 to a variable. var++ is the same as var = var+1 (or var += 1).</dd>

</dl>
