---
layout: page
title: "Graph Traversals &ndash; Breadth First Search & Depth First Search."
---

Suppose we want to find a path from one vertex to another in a graph, e.g., a
route in a map from a destination to a goal, or a sequence of mutual friends
connecting you to someone else. That's the problem of graph search. There are
many approaches, depending on the information we have available. When all we
have is the graph structure itself (i.e., nothing to help us know or guess how
close we are to the goal), we're essentially doing "blind search". We'll look
at those in general (thinking of undirected graphs), then extend our thinking to
directed graphs, along with a way to associate extra information with the vertices
(or edges).

## Outline
{:.no_toc}

* Outline
{:toc}

## Blind search

<strong>Depth-first search</strong> (DFS) is like what you probably do in exploring
a maze. You keep going deeper and deeper in the maze, making choices at the various
forks in the road, until you hit a dead-end. Then you back up to one of the choice
points and make a different choice. [Example in class.] If you're fairy-tale
clever, you'll scatter some bread crumbs behind you, so that you can see if you've
come back to the same point and are just walking in circles. Then you'd want to
do the same thing as if you hit a dead end.

To make this intuitive description a little more precise, we rely on a <em>stack</em>.
For DFS we do the following:

```
Push the start vertex v onto the stack
Repeat until we find the goal vertex or the stack is empty:
  Pop the next vertex v from the stack
  If v has not been visited
    Mark v as visited (and maybe do some processing)
    for all vertices v' that are adjacent to v
      If we haven't already visited v':
        push v' onto the stack
```

We can keep track which vertices we have visited with a list (or a <code>Set</code>,
more abstractly). The book uses an alternative approach, "decoration", discussed
below.

The book uses recursion instead of an explicit stack. We discussed that relationship
when we first discussed stacks, so comparing and contrasting here might help drive
that home.

The book also notes that edges can be broken into two groups (for an undirected
graph): <em>discovery</em> edges and <em>back</em> edges. They even add another
decoration to keep track of edge type. Discovery edges are the first edge to find
a vertex. They form a tree, the DFS tree. Back edges go back up the tree to an
ancestor, and indicate that a cycle exists in the graph. The book's generic DFS
algorithm is a template that allows you to supply methods to be done when a vertex
is first visited, when traversing discovery or back edges, when leaving a vertex
after visiting it, etc.

The book presents a lot of problems that can be solved by DFS &mdash; reachability,
strongly connected components, transitive closure, and topological sorting.

For searching, DFS is a fine technique if we just want to find the goal, and don't
want to keep too many alternatives around. But what if we want to find the
<em>shortest</em> path? An example: the Bacon game (Lab 5) / six degrees of
separation. In that case, instead of searching in a depth-first manner, we search
in a breadth-first manner.

<strong>Breadth-first search</strong> (BFS) expands uniformly in all "directions",
like radiating ripples; the directions here are edges out of a vertex. So it finds
all the vertices 1 step away, then all those 2 steps away, etc. Thus we know once
we've found the goal, we've got the shortest set of edges from the start vertex to it.

This requires only a small change in our search strategy: rather than using a stack,
we use a queue. With a just a few word changes to our algorithm, using a queue
instead of a stack, we go from DFS to BFS:

```
Enqueue the start vertex v onto the queue
Repeat until we find the goal vertex or the queue is empty:
  Dequeue the next vertex v from the queue
  If v has not been visited
    Mark v as visited (and maybe do some processing)
    for all vertices v' that are adjacent to v
      If we haven't already visited v':
        enqueue v' onto the queue
```

While the above code works, we can optimize it a bit by noting that the first
item pushed onto the queue will be the first item off of the queue. Therefore
when we first discover a vertex we can mark it when we add it to the queue,
knowing that later discoveries of the vertex need not be added to the queue. (This
does not work for DFS, because if the most recently added copy of the vertex is the
one that comes off of the stack first and thus gets marked and its adjacent vertices
pushed onto the stack.) The optimized version is:

```
Enqueue the start vertex v onto the queue and mark it
Repeat until we find the goal vertex or the queue is empty:
  Dequeue the next vertex v from the queue
    (Maybe do some processing)
    for all vertices v' that are adjacent to v
      If we haven't already visited v':
        mark v' (and maybe do some processing)
        enqueue v' onto the queue
```

The edge types in BFS are discovery edges or cross edges. No edge goes back to
an ancestor, because it would have been visited in the forward direction earlier.

Instead of just keeping track of which vertices we've visited, it's helpful to
keep track of how we arrived at each vertex. So instead of a visited list, we
build a visited <em>tree</em>, where the parent of a vertex is the vertex from
which we discovered it. Note that the parent is unique (since we don't visit a
vertex twice), and thus gives a tree. However, we will often use a graph ADT to
hold this tree. It gives us a way to do edge labels and to find particular vertices
quickly.

We can do a BFS from a start vertex without any goal in mind &mdash; just run until
we've visited the whole graph (or at least the part of it that is reachable from
the start vertex). Then we have a <em>BFS tree</em> that has shortest paths from
each reachable vertex to the start vertex. To find such a shortest path, we just
find the desired vertex (e.g., an actor) in the tree, and follow edges back to the
start vertex (e.g., Kevin Bacon); we can keep track of the edges (movie titles)
on the way back. **Demo.**

## Directed Graphs

Recall that directed graphs distinguish an edge from A to B vs. the one from B
to A. We'll use directed graphs to store BFS trees. And in other applications
(an example from last time: Twitter followers) with asymmetric relationships,
they would be the appropriate way to encode the relationships.

The book suggests that to deal with directed graphs two methods be added the the
Graph interface:

* <code>isDirected(e)</code>: Test if e is a directed edge.
* <code>insertDirectedEdge(v, w, label)</code>: Create a directed edge from v to w with value label

I find it useful to add four additional methods:

* <code>incidentEdgesIn(w)</code>: Return an iterable collection of the edges directed into w.
* <code>incidentEdgesOut(w)</code>: Return an iterable collection of the edges directed out of w.
* <code>inDegree(v)</code>: Return in-degree of v.
* <code>outDegree(v)</code>: Return the out-degree of v.

How do directed edges change things? For the representations with edge lists,
edges now just go in one direction. (Unless it is a mixed graph, with both directed
and undirected edges.) It is important that the <code>endVertices(e)</code> method
returns an array with <code>A[0]</code> as the source and <code>A[1]</code> as the
destination, or we would be unable to determine which direction the edge was directed.
You will implement a class <code>DirectedAdjListMap</code> by extending
<code>AdjacencyListGraphMap</code>.

We can do DFS and BFS on directed graphs the same as with undirected ones. Just
be careful to follow the edges the right direction! (Memories of driving in Boston,
when a one-way street in one direction meets a one-way street in the other direction.)
With DFS on a directed graph, there are additional relationships in the DFS
tree: <em>forward</em> edges connect a node to a descendent and <em>cross</em>
edges connect two nodes, neither of which is the ancestor of the other.

## Decoration

I suggested above that a directed graph could be implemented by extending an
undirected graph. But this raises a potential problem: undirected graph provides
an <code>insertEdge</code> method that doesn't distinguish the directionality of
the edge (since there is no such thing). How do we manage to mark that an edge
is directed? It would seem that we would have to go into the <code>AdjacencyListGraphMap</code>
code to add additional information to the way that the edge is represented.

It turns out that this is a common problem. When searching a graph, how do we
determine if an edge or vertex has already been visited? The pseudocode assumed
that we were keeping that information in a separate data structure (like a visited set),
but it would be convenient to have a way to directly "mark" edges and vertices.

The basic idea is that we would like to "decorate" an edge or vertex with some
additional information that is relevant to the algorithms but does not change the
element saved in the position or require changes to the code of the class being
used or extended. The way to do this is to add a small map to <code>MyPosition</code>
and have it implement the <code>Map</code> interface as well as the <code>Position</code>
interface. The book has in interface for this decorated position called a
<code>DecorablePosition</code>. Then the class <code>MyPosition</code> in
<code>AdjacencyListGraph</code> extends <code>HashTableMap</code> and implements
<code>DecorablePosition</code>. (<code>HashTableMap</code> is the authors'
implementation of open addressing with linear probing.) The default constructor
constructs a table of size 3. Why so small? Because we don't expect many
"decorations".

How do we use this map to decorate a position? We can see it used in the book's
DFS. They create an object <code>STATUS</code> to use as the key in the map.
They also create objects <code>VISITED</code> and <code>UNVISITED</code> to be
values associated with the key <code>STATUS</code>. If they needed other decorations
they would have created appropriately named keys and values for them as well.
They then mark a position p as visited by calling <code>p.put(STATUS, VISITED);</code>,
then mark it unvisited by calling <code>p.put(STATUS, UNVISITED);</code>, and
they test to see if a position is visited by calling <code>p.get(STATUS) == VISITED</code>.
(Note that they could have eliminated <code>UNVISITED</code> by just having
<code>get</code> return <code>VISITED</code> or <code>null</code>.)

This is a useful design pattern. The basic idea is to supply a map so that anyone
can add any property that they want to the object without changing the object's
implementation. You will use it in the short assignment.
