---
layout: page
title: "Searching Hierarchies – Binary Search Trees"
---

## Outline
{:.no_toc}

* Outline
{:toc}

All the code files for today:
<a href="resources/BST.java">BST.java</a> |
<a href="resources/InvalidKeyException.java">InvalidKeyException.java</a>

One very powerful use of binary trees is as a structure capturing the steps we
would take in doing a binary search. Why is this useful? Recall
[binary search](https://www.khanacademy.org/computing/computer-science/algorithms/binary-search/a/implementing-binary-search-of-an-array)
(we'll go over it in class in case you don't) &mdash; it quickly finds a key in a fixed-sized
array by looking in the left portion or the right portion. But it works with a
fixed array. A tree can more easily be dynamically modified, with data added and
removed. It then supports efficient look-up.

A binary search tree (BST) is actually generic with two parameters: that of the
key and that of the value.

```java
public class BST<K,V> {
    private K key;
    private V value;
    private BST<K,V> left, right;
}
```

For example, we could have keys be Strings (e.g., names) and values be BufferedImages
(their mug shots). One thing about generics: they need to be classes. So what do
we do for primitive objects like ints and floats? Java actually provides corresponding
"wrapper" classes, Integer and Float, that "wrap up" or "box" a primitive into an
object. Java handles the conversion automatically, when it can infer what's going
on ("autoboxing" and "unboxing"); we can also force it ourselves, e.g., by
"`Integer i = new Integer(3);`". With this in mind, then, a BST could have as its
keys Integers (e.g., zip codes) and the values also Integers (e.g., populations).

"Why?" You might ask, "is this necessary?". Fair question. Check out the response
\[[here](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/3579035/why-are-there-wrapper-classes-in-java/3579074#3579074)\].

## BSTs and Searching

Let's think about how a tree could be useful for searching. The BST property says
that the keys in the left subtree are all less that those in the parent, and those
in the right subtree are all greater than it. (We'll disallow equality.) So then
how would we find the node with a given search key (or determine that it doesn't
exist)? Compare to the node's key. If they're equal, we're done. If the search
key is less than the node's key, recurse on the left; else recurse on the right.

<a href="resources/BST.java">BST.java</a> has the class itself, and
<a href="resources/InvalidKeyException.java">InvalidKeyException</a> a special-purpose
exception. (As with binary trees, this version is a bit simpler but not as powerful
as the code from the book; read the book for more depth.) The algorithm just described
is coded in find(). Our new exception type handles (and makes clear) the case where
the key isn't in the tree.

### Comparing Generic Objects

One tricky thing is that, as we discussed above, we have to be able to compare.
But we don't know what kinds of things are in the tree &mdash; it's generic. If
we knew the keys were ints, we could use &lt; and &gt;, but what do we do for
generics? Java provides an interface Comparable that defines a method compareTo()
to test two objects. It returns 0 if they are equal, a negative number if the
one being asked is less than the parameter, and a positive number if the one being
asked is greater. So we have to specify that it's not any old class for the key,
but one that implements Comparable. Confusingly, we say "K extends Comparable"
even though it's an interface.

```java
/*
 * A Super Bowl 2015 example for using compareTo().
 */
String s1 = "Seahawks";
String s2 = "Patriots";

int result = s1.compareTo(s2);
if (result > 0)
    System.out.println(s1 + " is greater!");
else if (result == 0)
    System.out.println("I guess they are equal...");
else if (result < 1)
    System.out.println(s2 + " is greater!");
else
    System.out.println("ERROR! compareTo() shouldn't return anything other than -1, 0, or 1...");        
```

I can't help how this example worked out... :)

### Insertion

We can also easily modify a BST on the fly (compare to inserting into a sorted
array for binary search). Inserting is very similar to searching. If we find the
key, we replace the value with the new one. If we reach a leaf, we add the new
element there. (That is where it belongs &mdash; any search for it in the future
will follow the same path through the tree and will find it.) We insert the element
in the leaf and add two leaves below it.

### Deletion

Deletion is a bit trickier. Find the thing to delete. Easy if either child is a
leaf &mdash; point parent at the other child (which may also be a leaf). Preserves
order. If two children, have a problem. Can't point parent at both. Re-inserting
one subtree leads to unbalanced trees. Solution: replace thing with two children
by immediate predecessor or successor in the tree. (Thus we get same answer as
original when searching for any item in the tree.) Immediate successor is the
smallest thing in the right subtree. Find smallest by going left until left child
is a leaf. But that means that this node has a leaf as a child, so can be easily
deleted.

### Implications of Modifying (Insertions/Deletions) BSTs

In general, a bunch of inserts and deletes can lead to an unbalanced tree &mdash; more
nodes along one side than the other. In the worst case, we end up with a linear
structure (a list represented as a tree) and get a vine instead of a tree.
Sometimes we don't want to risk a bad run time when the data is not random.
(Especially because a bad case is when the data is inserted in increasing or
decreasing order!) To ensure balance requires more bookkeeping and occasional
fix-ups; later we will see a type of BST called a red-black tree that handles that.

## Java notes

<dl>
 <dt>primitive wrapping / boxing</dt>
 <dd>To use a primitive piece of data (int, float, etc.) where we need an object (e.g., to go in an ArrayList, or in our BST), we use a wrapper class (Integer, Float, etc.) that boxes the data in an object. Java can automatically box and unbox for us in many cases.</dd>
</dl>
