---
layout: page
title: "Hierarchies – Trees & Recursion"
---

We have dealt with a couple of organizations of data so far &mdash; grid-based
(images) and linear (lists). Today we'll deal with data that's hierarchical in
nature. Hierarchically organized things that come to my mind: <a href="http://itol.embl.de">the tree of life</a>,
many tournaments, XML and HTML documents (take a look at document structure in browser),
folders nested inside folders nested inside ... on computers.

We can represent hierarchical relationships using a data structure called a <em>tree</em>.
A tree is built up from <em>nodes</em>. Tree terminology is taken from family trees.
The top node is called the <em>root</em>. Each node has zero or more <em>children</em>.
An <em>edge</em> connects a node and a child. Nodes having no children are called
<em>external nodes</em> (or <em>leaves</em>) and nodes with children are called
<em>internal nodes</em>. A child has exactly one <em>parent</em> (except for the
root, which has no parent). Nodes with the same parent are <em>siblings</em>. <em>Ancestors</em>
and <em>descendents</em> are what you would expect from family trees. A <em>subtree</em>
of a node consists of all descendents of that node (including the node itself).

We'll build up some tree representations and related algorithms for dealing with
some different types of hierarchical data. The textbook provides additional reading,
but note that they use a somewhat different (more powerful, but more complicated)
representation of trees. So read it to gain additional description and examples,
but don't be thrown by the code itself.

## Outline
{:.no_toc}

* Outline
{:toc}

All the code files for today:
1. <a href="resources/BinaryTree.java">BinaryTree.java</a>
2. <a href="resources/ExampleXML.java">ExampleXML.java</a>
3. <a href="resources/Expression.java">Expression.java</a> |
<a href="resources/ExpressionDriver.java">ExpressionDriver.java</a> |
<a href="resources/Constant.java">Constant.java</a> |
<a href="resources/BinaryOp.java">BinaryOp.java</a> |
<a href="resources/Variable.java">Variable.java</a> |
<a href="resources/Sum.java">Sum.java</a> |
<a href="resources/Difference.java">Difference.java</a> |
<a href="resources/Product.java">Product.java</a> |
<a href="resources/Quotient.java">Quotient.java</a> |
<a href="resources/UnassignedVariableException.java">UnassignedVariableException.java</a>

## Binary trees

There is a special, and very common, kind of tree called a <em>binary</em> tree, where each node has 0, 1, or 2 children. The tree of life we're looking at has that structure. (And so does an ancestor tree, where a node's "children" in the tree structure are its parents in real life. There are always two, except in the case of cloning, etc.)

Some binary tree code: <a href="resources/BinaryTree.java">BinaryTree.java</a>. A tree has a "left" and a "right", which could be children or could be null. It also has "data" stored at the node (e.g., the name of the organism). We don't really care what type the data is, so we make it a parameter: "BinaryTree&lt;E&gt;". Simple accessors determine whether the tree has leaves, and whether it is an inner node or a leaf. This version doesn't include a parent, but that's an easy extension, and would allow one to go back up a tree from a node.

Most tree code is recursive, so this is a chance to polish up those skills.
For example, the ***size*** of a tree (# nodes in it) is the size of its left tree plus that of its right tree plus 1 (the parent).
The ***height*** of an inner node (longest path to a leaf) is the longer of the height down the left side vs. the right side, plus 1; the height of a leaf is just 0.
The ***fringe*** of a tree (a left-to-right list of its leaves) is obtained by first adding the fringe of the left child and then adding the fringe of the right child.
Note the use of a helper function to pass along the list.
Two trees are ***equal*** if they have the same data and their children are equal.

Finally, we have conversion to and from a string. Java has a standard method named `toString()`, which is defined in the root Object class and thus there for all classes to override. It's very convenient, because then when you ask to print an object (or use it in any context wanting a string), that method is automatically used to perform the conversion. We have to decide for our class how to do that, though. Here, we print out an indented representation, where at each level we indent two more spaces.

Parsing a tree from a string representation is much harder. Just to support testing, I implemented a simple and completely non-robust version of a <a href="http://evolution.genetics.washington.edu/phylip/newicktree.html">Newick format</a> parser. The <a href="http://itol.embl.de">interactive tree of life</a> provided a Newick-format dump of the default tree: <a href="resources/itol.txt">itol.txt</a>. Newick trees are parenthesized, with labels for the nodes (optional, but my parser requires them) and commas separating the children; the whole tree ends in a semicolon. For example, "((a,b)c,(d,e)f)g;" for a tree with root "g" that has two parents "c" and "f", such that "c" has leaf children "a" and "b" and likewise for "f" with "d" and "e". My parser uses the (now deprecated) tokenizer in Java to split the string up at parentheses and commas. When it sees an open paren, it recursively parses the left subtree, then gets the comma, then recursively parses the right subtree, then gets the close paren, then the node label. (Newick trees also allow distances from parent to child; I just throw those away.)

## General Trees

A "general" tree can have any number of children. In some cases, the order of children does not matter (e.g., files in a folder; can be sorted many different ways as a separate process). However, for an HTML document the order is very important! In representing trees we end up imposing an order on children, whether it is important or arbitrary.

Let's use XML and HTML documents as examples of general trees: <a href="resources/test.xml">test.xml</a> and <a href="resources/test.html">test.html</a>. (Note that you'll want to "view source" in your browser to see the HTML file's actual structure.) This isn't a course on HTML, but I'd recommend the <a href="http://docs.webplatform.org/wiki/Main_Page">web standards curriculum</a> for a nice tutorial, and the <a href="http://www.w3.org">W3C</a> for all the details and their own <a href="http://www.w3.org/community/webed/wiki/HTML/Training">tutorials</a>.

XML and HTML are represented internally by a Document Object Model (DOM), which is a tree. Nodes are associated with an open/close tag pair or with a piece of text. You can see from the indentation how this tree is organized. We saw in the Flickr search client that Java provide a class to parse an XML file into a DOM tree, but we didn't make much use of the structure. Now let's write some code to work with these trees, as with binary trees: <a href="resources/ExampleXML.java">ExampleXML.java</a>.

Key bits of the Node class provided by Java:

<ul>
  <li>It has a "type", accessed by getNodeType(), indicating whether it's a document node (the top of the tree), an element node (essentially a tag in the tree), a text node (the stuff in between element nodes), or something else. Constants like Node.DOCUMENT_NODE indicate the different types.</li>
  <li>An element node has a name, via getName(), indicating the tag.</li>
  <li>An element node has attributes, a special type of list accessed by getAttributes(). The attributes can be gotten from the list by item(index), and the length of the list by getLength(). Thus we can write a standard for loop (not for-each) to look at all the attributes.</li>
  <li>An attribute has a name, via getNodeName(), and a value, via getNodeValue(). Recall the attribute says "name=value".</li>
  <li>A text node has a value, via getNodeValue(), giving the string of text.</li>
  <li>Nodes can have children, again in a special-purpose list. We iterate through the list by starting with getFirstChild(), asking that child to getNextSibling(), and continuing until the child is null.</li>
</ul>

So printTree() works much like for binary trees, except we have to handle the different node types differently, and we have to recurse for each child in the child list. A related method illustrates a simplistic form of HTML rendering (still textually), converting text to upper-case when it's enclosed in a "b" tag (bold) or an "h1" tag (header level 1). The "h1" also gets underlined.

We can do other tree-style algorithms on this general tree structure. E.g., we can recurse through it to find all images &mdash; elements named "img" have an attribute named "src" whose value gives the URL of the image. We build up a list, like we did with fringe() in a binary tree.

## Expression trees

In the DOM tree, we have a single class Node that indicates what type it is. It actually might be more convenient to have different subclasses for different types; e.g., "Element extends Node", etc. We could have done that with binary trees, too, with a Leaf type that never has children.

Our next example makes use of different subclasses to represent pieces of an arithmetic expression, e.g., "1+2*(3+x)". Eclipse and the Java compiler actually construct an analogous representation in evaluating your code. The book has a single-class / dispatch-on-type version, but having separate subclasses makes some things much cleaner.

The first thing to look at is <a href="resources/Expression.java">Expression.java</a>. It is an <em>interface</em> that says that an Expression must provide two methods: eval() and deriv(). (We'll go much deeper into the philosophy of interfaces next week; for now think of it as just a set of methods that a class must implement.) The first evaluates the expression and the second takes its derivative symbolically. An Expression should also override toString(). <a href="resources/ExpressionDriver.java">ExpressionDriver.java</a> demonstrates building and uses some expressions. (Note we could not add a main() method to Expression to do this because Expression is an interface.)

Look at <a href="resources/Constant.java">Constant.java</a>. It is the simplest subclass. To evaluate it you return its value and its derivative is always the constant 0.0. The strange thing is that the constructor is private, and there is a static method called make(). This is an variant of a design pattern called the ***factory pattern***. Instead of constructing objects directly users have to go through a method to get an object. One use is to allow the factory to decide to create a subclass object when asked to create a superclass
object. We'll see that later. Another use is to provide different ways to create an object using parameters of the same type (so overloading doesn't work).

<a href="resources/Variable.java">Variable.java</a> is similar, but it has a <em>symbol table</em> to save variable values. These are saved in a Map that is implemented using a hash table. We will see more about most of these later, but for now it is enough to know that a map stores (key, value) pairs. When we want the value, we give it the associated key. We call symbolTable.put(varName, value) to add a variable name with a given value to the map and symbolTable.get(varName) to retrieve the value if the key is there. (We get back "null" if it is not.) Instead of printing an error message if the variable name is not in the symbol table we throw an exception. We will look at that later. The rest is fairly straightforward. The derivative of a variable is 1 if the derivative is taken with respect to that variable and 0 otherwise. Note the call to Constant.make() to create the 0 or 1 constant.

The classes <a href="resources/Sum.java">Sum.java</a>, <a href="resources/Difference.java">Difference.java</a>, <a href="resources/Product.java">Product.java</a>, and <a href="resources/Quotient.java">Quotient.java</a> all perform eval() by evaluating their operands and performing an operation on them. The only difference is the operator. Therefore I have created an abstract class <a href="resources/BinaryOp.java">BinaryOp.java</a> with the template for evaluating a binary expression and another template for toString(). These templates call abstract methods doOperation() and getOperation(), respectively. (The latter returns a string representation of the operator). It also has accessor methods to get the first or second expression.

This simplifies the writing of the Sum, Difference, Product, and Quotient classes. We will look at Sum. It provides the necessary two methods, which are fairly trivial. It supplies its deriv() method, which adds the derivatives of its operands. But the interesting thing is Sum.make(). Here we see the power of a factory method. It tries to simplify the expression. If the two things it is adding are constants, it adds them to get a new constant. If either operand is 0 it returns the other. So in three of the four cases it does not even create a Sum object! The other three operations are similar.

Finally, we write our own exceptions: <a href="resources/UnassignedVariableException.java">UnassignedVariableException.java</a>, which can be thrown by Variable. No Java-provided exception really described the problem, so we extend RuntimeException to create one whose name was more descriptive.

## Java notes

<dl>

<dt>toString</dt>
<dd>A standard method provided by any Object to return a String representation for printing, etc.</dd>

<dt>switch</dt>
<dd>Like a big if-else if-else, testing equality (==) of the "switch"ed value against a set of "case"s. Just to be syntactically inconsistent, the "case" code blocks do not have braces, but instead just follow the "case" keyword and a colon, and end with "break;". A "default" can be provided, analogous to an "else".</dd>

</dl>
