---
layout: page
title: "Iterating"
---

Our simple list interface was sufficient to do lots of things with lists. For example,
we can see if an element appears in the list by getting each item and seeing if
it's what we wanted, and we can test equality of two lists by marching down each
of them in tandem and comparing items.

This style of going through a data structure is so common that there's a name for
it: an <strong>iterator</strong>. In fact, it's the basis of one of the standard
interfaces in Java: the Iterator interface. We'll do just the core part to let
us iterate over the objects: hasNext() tells us whether or not there's something
left to get, and next() gets it and advances the iteration.

## Outline
{:.no_toc}

* Outline
{:toc}

Code:
<a href="resources/SimpleIterator.java">SimpleIterator.java</a> |
<a href="resources/SimpleIList.java">SimpleIList.java</a> |
<a href="resources/IterTest.java">IterTest.java</a> |
<a href="resources/ISinglyLinked.java">ISinglyLinked.java</a> |
<a href="resources/IGrowingArray.java">IGrowingArray.java</a> |
<a href="resources/IBinaryTree.java">IBinaryTree.java</a>

Reference: It may be helpful to refer back to [lecture 10](../10/10.html) where we
first saw the SimpleList interface as well as basic definitions of a SinglyLinked list
and a GrowingArray list.

## Iterators

First look at the interface for the iterator, <a href="resources/SimpleIterator.java">SimpleIterator.java</a>.

Also, look at the updated SimpleList interface from [lecture 10](../10/10.html)
that we are now calling [SimpleIList](resources/SimpleIList.java) (since the
interface has been updated to include a method that gets a new iterator).

Here's an example of both approaches in action: <a href="resources/IterTest.java">IterTest.java</a>.
There isn't a huge difference in style, though the iterator version makes clear
exactly what the loop is all about. In fact, the for-each loop is just "syntactic
sugar" for this approach.

## Iterators: SLL

There is, however, a potential efficiency difference. Remember that for the linked
list, get starts from the beginning. So it's pretty wasteful to do that each
time through the loop &mdash; we should just pick up where we left off. That's
what our implementation will do.

The implementation of an iterator for a linked list just keeps a pointer to an
element, and advances by the next when asked to. When we reach the end (null),
we indicate that there is no next. <a href="resources/ISinglyLinked.java">ISinglyLinked.java</a>.

## Iterators: GrowingArray

For a growing array, we keep the current index into the array, incrementing by 1
each time, until we reach the size of the array. <a href="resources/IGrowingArray.java">IGrowingArray.java</a>.

The Java list iterator, as well as that described in the book, is quite a bit
fancier. It supports moving bidirectionally (in a doubly linked implementation),
adding/removing/replacing at the current position, etc. But the basic idea of
packaging up a position into a list remains the same.

## Iterators: BinaryTree

When we come to binary trees, it gets a bit stickier to establish an iterator.
We know we need to recurse, but in what order do we handle the nodes? Do we produce
a node before both its children? Between its left child and right child? After both
its children? (In English programming, we'll probably always do left before right :).
These are different "traversal" orders &mdash; **preorder** (node before children),
**inorder** (between), and **postorder** (after) &mdash; and your book goes through them
(and a generalization) in detail.

Let's just do a preorder iterator, and use it to count the number of nodes
(the order doesn't even matter in that case). In a recursive preorder traversal,
we do something with the current node, then recurse on the left, then recurse
on the right. On making a call, Java keeps a stack that remembers what to do
after that call. So when we does something with the node, it remembers to come
back and recurse on the left. And when we recurse on the left, it remembers to c
ome back and recurse on the right. There's nothing to do after recursing on the
right (so in some languages, the recursive call would be optimized away &mdash;
tail recursion).

To turn the recursion into an iteration, basically what we do is to explicitly
keep track of the calls, by way of a stack. <a href="resources/IBinaryTree.java">IBinaryTree.java</a>.
To handle a node, we push its right child on the stack, and then push its left
child, and then return the node. Thus we handle the node first, then its left
hild, and then its right child. And to handle the left child, we'll do the same
thing &mdash; push its right and its left, and return it.
