---
layout: page
title: "Short Assignment 11 &mdash; Due: Monday, March 9"
---

## Exercises ##

[Adapted from CTCI problem 18.8.] In this short assignment you will work with
suffix trees. In this assignment, you need to construct a suffix tree (given a string),
and implement a method that allows one to search the suffix tree for
a given substring. You should return a list of the indices indicating the starting
position where the pattern is found, or ```null``` if the substring is not found within
the suffix tree. Specifically, you have to:

1. Complete the code for the constructor in ```SuffixTree.java```, which builds a
   suffix tree based on the input string.
2. Complete the ```insertString``` method in ```SuffixTreeNode.java``` which handles
   inserting a string into the current suffix tree node. (*Hint: it may be helpful
   to use this method in part 1*).
3. Complete the ```search``` method in ```SuffixTreeNode.java``` which handles
   searching for a string in the current suffix tree.

This is a "tricky" problem, requiring a bit of thought. Make sure to give yourself
time to think about how this stuff works before diving into coding &mdash; there isn't
too much code to write.

**A couple of notes:**

* We give you some [\[code\]](resources/suffix-tree-code.zip) to get you started
  so you can focus on the actual problem at hand. Make sure to spend a little time
  up front getting to understand what we've provided.
* Note that a suffix tree is in fact a *tree* &mdash; thus, it may in fact make
  sense to solve these problems *recursively*.
* A suffix tree consists of a collection of ```SuffixTreeNode``` objects linked together.
  In this approach, a SuffixTreeNode keeps track of its children by using a ```Map```
  of ```Character``` to its respective ```SuffixTreeNode``` object. You should
  check to see if a SuffixTreeNode exists in the tree before deciding to add a new
  one to the tree &mdash; if one exists already, you should "update" that one since
  this means you've found a new suffix that uses this root.
* Notice that we give you a little driver in the main method of ```SuffixTree.java``` to
  aid you in the development of the SA. We also provide code for the toString() in
  order to print the suffix tree. Below, we provide the output from a test run with
  our sample solution where we create a suffix tree from the input word "bibs"
  and search for substrings "b", "ibs", "bs", "s", and "si":

```
word: bibs
suffix tree:
*
  b
    i
      b
        s
    s
  i
    b
      s
  s

found 'b' @ [0, 2]
found 'ibs' @ [1]
found 'bs' @ [2]
found 's' @ [3]
found 'si' @ null
```

You should walk through the construction of this example (input string = "bibs") on
paper to make sure you understand the tree and why this output makes sense.

## Submission Instructions ##

Turn in your completed code and the output from the test run.
