---
layout: page
title: "Image Interaction"
---

Now that we are comfortable with how images are represented and can be manipulated,
let us see how to do something that is interactive. While the image processing concepts
are the same as last time, interactivity will require us to represent and deal
with mouse-based input. We will also make use of arrays.

## Outline
{:.no_toc}

* Outline
{:toc}

All the code files for today:
[ImageInteractionCore.java](resources/ImageInteractionCore.java),
[ImageInteraction.java](resources/ImageInteraction.java),
[Puzzle.java](resources/Puzzle.java),
[Slideshow.java](resources/Slideshow.java),
[dart-imgs.zip](resources/dart.zip)

## Core code

We are going to start with a subtle but helpful switch. Rather than creating a
DrawingFrame and using it within our object, we will make our object *be* an
extended remix of DrawingFrame. This is our first taste of **inheritance**, which
we will cover in depth next class. For now, note that in [ImageInteractionCore.java](resources/ImageInteractionCore.java),
we say "public class ImageInteractionCore extends DrawingFrame", indicating that
our class extends the functionality provided by DrawingFrame. Then in our
constructor, we call the DrawingFrame constructor (referred to as "super", for
the "superclass"). The important thing about this inheritance is that objects of
our class are extended versions of objects of the superclass. Thus they have
access to the instance variables and methods of the superclass (as long as
they are not declared "private"). This is illustrated by printing the image
width and height &mdash; that refers to the instance variable declared in
DrawingFrame. We will use this later to access the image that is part of the
DrawingFrame.

## Events

In order to respond to user input, we need a way to represent the input and invoke appropriate methods. The representation is in terms of "events" (e.g., the event that the mouse was pressed), and a "listener" machinery tells the GUI what events to pay attention to, and what to do when they happen.

We saw that earlier with key presses, and I swept the details under the rug. We will also make use of mouse events, including both motion and button presses. For key presses, Java provides KeyEvent instances. For mouse motion, it provides MouseMotion.
And for all other kinds of mouse stuff, Java provides MouseEvents &mdash; when a mouse button is pressed, released, or clicked (pressed and released without intevening motion), and when the mouse enters from outside the window or exits from the window.
The MouseEvent object contains information about where the event happened, which button, modifiers, etc.

We have to tell Java what to do when it notices some such event. This is handled by a listener object that provides an appropriate method to invoke with the event. An example:

```
addKeyListener(new KeyAdapter() {
  public void keyTyped(KeyEvent event) {
    System.out.println(event);
  }
}
```

Try putting that in the constructor. Note that the name of the method suggests that we can add multiple listeners, each of which will be informed of events. The listener is added to whatever is doing the listening.

<p>The syntax for adding one of these listeners (in this way) is quite strange, but makes sense once you get used to it. It invokes "new" to create a new object, but what kind of object? It is a new object of an "anonymous" class (i.e., one we never bother to give a name too) that provides the functionality specified by KeyAdapter, namely a keyTyped() method. So when the listener detects a key press, it calls the keyTyped method we provided. The really powerful thing is that this method is in some sense "inside" our object, and thus has access to its state. E.g.:</p>

```
addKeyListener(new KeyAdapter() {
  public void keyTyped(KeyEvent event) {
    System.out.println(image.getWidth());
  }
});
```

<p>Here "image" refers to the image contained by the ImageInteraction instance (which as mentioned above, gets it from the DrawingFrame). Likewise we could call a method of that instance.</p>

<p>For key presses, we just add the listener to the DrawingFrame. But for mouse presses, we need to know the location of the mouse, and want that to be relative to image being displayed. There is another instance variable called "canvas" that handles the drawing. So we add MouseListeners and MouseMotionListeners to it.</p>

```
canvas.addMouseListener(new MouseAdapter() {
  public void mousePressed(MouseEvent event) {
    System.out.println(event);
  }
});
```

## Interaction

Now we turn to the complete code, <a href="resources/ImageInteraction.java">ImageInteraction.java</a>.

<p>First let us print out the color wherever the mouse is. See the mouse motion bit in the constructor. We just access the x and y coordinates of the mouse event, and get the RGB / Color at that point.</p>

<p>Using key press machinery analogous to what we did with image processing (but now with an idea of what the event machinery is), we can determine which key was pressed and act accordingly. Here we just use it to set the "action" of how to deal with mouse presses. Each character indicates a different response.</p>

<p>For our mouse press actions, we can start out by "grabbing" the color at the mouse press, with the same kind of operation to access the Color, which we then hold onto in an instance variable.</p>

Then we can draw a square of that color around whever the mouse is pressed. That is just the usual nested loops (checking for boundaries!) packaged up in drawSquare().

<p>For something a bit fancier, I included another image processing method, lens(), that kind of magnifies the image around a point. We use the mouse press location as the point. The lens() method itself has our usual nested loops, but only does something if the distance from the current (x,y) to the one passed in (cx,cy) [from the mouse event] is small enough. If so, the value at (x,y) is taken from a point toward the center.</p>

<p>Since we have modified the image in responding to the mouse event, we need to let Java know to update the window. The repaint() method is the correct way to do that; we call it at the end of handling the mouse pressed event, once everything is in place to be repainted.</p>

## Multiple images

**Joke:** [Delivery](resources/joke.jpg) ... [Punchline](resources/joke2.jpg)

:)

It is not a big jump to move from handling a single image to handling a whole list.
Java has different ways to handle multiple objects; we will start with an array, which is a fixed-length, random-access representation.
So it is like a list in Python except we cannot directly add to / remove from it.
And it is just like an array in C, though differs from Matlab in that it is 0-indexed rather than 1-indexed (the first element is array[0]).

Our first example is a slideshow, <a href="resources/Slideshow.java">Slideshow.java</a>, using the images in <a href="resources/dart.zip">dart.zip</a> (like the Baker one we have been using, <a href="http://commons.wikimedia.org/">Wikimedia commons</a> images in the <a href="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Dartmouth_College">Dartmouth College</a> category).

The first use of arrays comes when we read them in from a set of files:

```java
BufferedImage[] images = new BufferedImage[numSlides];
for (int i = 0; i < numSlides; i++) {
  images[i] = ImageIO.read(new File("pictures/dart"+i+".jpg"));
}
```

Key points:

<ul>
  <li>An array object is declared with [] after the type of thing that goes in the array. Here we have an array of BufferedImages, indicated "BufferedImage[]".</li>
  <li>Declaring the array is not sufficient (and will result in a run-time error); we must "new" it and say how many items it is to hold. Here that iss specified at the top of the class.</li>
  <li>An array element is accessed with []; e.g., images[0] is the first image. On the left-hand side of an "=", that lets us stuff something in that slot in the array. Elsewhere it lets us get it.</li>
  <li>The array is indexed from 0, which is why images[0] is the first image. Note that images[numSlides-1] is thus the last one. Be very careful not to run off the end &mdash; if there are <i>n</i> elements in an array, we can only access 0 to <i>n</i>-1. You will get a run-time exception if you go "out of bounds" (past the length of the array).</li>
  <li>A standard way to loop over the array has a loop variable stepping from 0 to the less than length of the array (so at most the length - 1).</li>
</ul>

As another example:

```java
int[] numbers = new int[10];
for (int i=0; i<10; i++) {
  numbers[i] = i*2;
}

for (int i=0; i<5; i++) {
  int tmp = numbers[i];
  numbers[i] = numbers[9-i];
  numbers[9-i] = tmp;
}
```

<p>The basic picture is:</p>
<table>
  <tr><td>numbers[0]</td></tr>
  <tr><td>numbers[1]</td></tr>
  <tr><td>numbers[2]</td></tr>
  <tr><td>numbers[3]</td></tr>
  <tr><td>numbers[4]</td></tr>
  <tr><td>numbers[5]</td></tr>
  <tr><td>numbers[6]</td></tr>
  <tr><td>numbers[7]</td></tr>
  <tr><td>numbers[8]</td></tr>
  <tr><td>numbers[9]</td></tr>
</table>

To belabor the point, <bold>an array of n elements has elements indexed from 0 to n–1, only. An array of n elements does not have an element with index n.</bold> Thus the 10 elements of our array are numbers[0], numbers[1], numbers[2], ..., numbers[9].

The code:

* We declare an array of ints named "numbers".
* We initialize it to actually be able to hold 10 ints. (Again, if we don not use "new", there will be a run-time error &mdash; try it so you will recognize it.)
* We have one loop over each element in the array (0..9) and set its value. What is in the array now? (Again, if we go &lt;= 10 rather than &lt; 10 there will be a run-time error &mdash; try it so you will recognize it.)
* We have another loop over half the array. What is in the array after this?

## Multiple multiple images

<p>We can make a puzzle by splitting a single image up into pieces that get shuffled up and then put back in place by the user. See <a href="resources/Puzzle.java">Puzzle.java</a>. </p>

<p>We store the puzzle pieces in a 2D array, like this:</p>

```java
BufferedImage[][] pieces = new BufferedImage[3][4];
```

<table>
 <tr><td>pieces[0][0]</td><td>pieces[0][1]</td><td>pieces[0][2]</td><td>pieces[0][3]</td></tr>
 <tr><td>pieces[1][0]</td><td>pieces[1][1]</td><td>pieces[1][2]</td><td>pieces[1][3]</td></tr>
 <tr><td>pieces[2][0]</td><td>pieces[2][1]</td><td>pieces[2][2]</td><td>pieces[2][3]</td></tr>
</table>

<p>Note that we index by row and then by column (which is kind of the opposite order from indexing pixels by x and then y).</p>

<p>Now to the code. We specify the number of rows and columns in the puzzle as "constant variables" (rather than magic numbers), using the Java "static final" tag. To create the pieces, we have nested loops over the pieces per row and per column, creating a new image for each as an appropriately-placed subimage of the original. If each piece is pieceWidth pixels wide, then the <i>c</i>th piece starts c*pieceWidth pixels over.</p>

<p>For illustrative purposes, we ignore the Java method to extract a subimage and set up our own getSubimage(). (This is a static function, as it does not belong to / need a Puzzle, but just the parameters passed to it; refer to constrain() from last class.) We create a new empty image, fill in its pixels, and return it.</p>

<p>To make it a puzzle, we need to shuffle up the pieces. A simple way to do that is to march through the array, for each (row, column) swapping the piece with some other randomly-chosen (row2, column2). We use the common technique of a local temporary variable to hold one member of the swapped pair.</p>

<p>Finally, we get back to the interactive part. We listen to the mouse press, and see which piece it was, by dividing the coordinates by the piece size. If it is the first piece selected, we just note that; if it is the second, we swap; if it is a repeat, we deselect.</p>

<p>To make sure that the puzzle is drawn (rather than the original image), we define our own draw() method to use instead of what DrawingFrame would normally do. We will talk much more about this overriding machinery in the next class, but note that the draw() method in our class has the same signature as in DrawingFrame, and is used in its place (i.e., whenever the drawing frame wants to draw, it recognizes that it is actually a puzzle, and uses the new method). Our new version simply loops over the pieces, drawing the images from the pieces array at the appropriate places. It also puts borders around them, with black borders for all the pieces other than the selected one.</p>

## Java notes

<dl>

<dt>superclass</dt>
<dd>When a class "extend"s another class, it inherits all of its methods and instance variables. We will get deeper into that next time.</dd>

<dt>super</dt>
<dd>A way to directly access a method of the superclass from a method of the subclass. By default, the superclass constructor is invoked automatically from the subclass constructor, but if it needs parameters, then this is a way to provide them. By default, other superclass methods are <em>not</em> automatically invoked from corresopnding subclass methods; the whole point of the subclass method is to refine the functionality appropriately. If that refinement entails just doing something in addition, then specifically call the "super".</dd>

<dt>interface</dt>
<dd>An interface specifies a set of methods, but no instance variables, and does not provide implementations for those methods. When a class "implement"s an interface, it must provide all the method implementations.</dd>

<dt>inner class</dt>
<dd>A class can be defined inside another class. This is useful, e.g., if it just supports the work of that class. The inner class then has access to the outer class variables and methods.</dd>

<dt>anonymous class</dt>
<dd>An instance of an inner class can be created without giving that class a name. The superclass is named, and the extensions (additional methods and instance variables) are directly coded within the "new" call.</dd>

<dt>final</dt>
<dd>This tag on a variable declaration indicates that its value will not ever be changed after being initially set. This is a good way to establish overall settings of a program in a clear, visible way, without "magic numbers" buried in the code.</dd>

</dl>
