---
layout: page
title: "Image Rendering &amp; Animation"
---

Today we'll go from static images to dynamic ones. That is, the pixels will have
lives of their own! We know how to access and process pixels, but now we'll have
to develop our own representation to animate them. This will be a chance to look
a bit more at object-oriented programming. We'll also extend our usage of Java
events to make things happen according to a timer. Finally, we'll move from arrays
to lists, which can change size over time.

## Outline
{:.no_toc}

* Outline
{:toc}

All the code files for today:
[Agent.java](resources/Agent.java) |
[Agents.java](resources/Agents.java) |
[AgentsCore.java](resources/AgentsCore.java) |
[AnimatedImage.java](resources/AnimatedImage.java) |
[Bouncer.java](resources/Bouncer.java) |
[Render.java](resources/Render.java) |
[Teleporter.java](resources/Teleporter.java) |
[Wanderer.java](resources/Wanderer.java) |
[WanderingPixel.java](resources/WanderingPixel.java) |
[WanderingPulsar.java](resources/WanderingPulsar.java)

## Core code

Let's start with a new class, "Agent", that we'll use to represent beings that
can move around a window; see [Agent.java](resources/Agent.java).
Each instance has a position (initialized in the constructor) and a radius
(defaulted to 5). It has a `move()` method that for now does nothing. Its "draw"
method puts a circle at its position, with its radius. (The Java `fillOval()`
takes the upper-left corner and total width and height, so we subtract out the
radius to center the agent.) And a `contains()` method checks whether a point is
within the agent's radius of its center.

The main state variables, `x` and `y`, are here declared "protected", something
we'll come back to later. And we use Eclipse's auto-generation of "getters" and
"setters" to allow other classes to access them. It's generally considered bad form
for a class to let other classes have access to its instance variables, as that
means that they are dependent on a particular implementation that might be subject
to change. (That rule of thumb breaks down for particularly simple classes that
are really just holding some data that might as well be transparent, e.g., the
"x" and "y" of the Point for an event.) We'll talk more about abstract data
types later, but for now, I just wanted to bring your attention to this typical
approach to allowing access to internal state when that is desirable. Note that
you don't have to write these methods yourself &mdash; Eclipse will do it for
you (under the Source menu).

Now we'll set up a scaffold for handling a bunch of agents; see
[AgentsCore.java](resources/AgentsCore.java). Now we'll need more than one agent,
but don't know <i>a priori</i> how many. So rather than using an array, we use a
more powerful container called a "list" (familiar to Python people). The class
is called "ArrayList", and we have to import it from "java.util". It's just a
list of objects (i.e., in order), with methods to add and remove elements.
Notably, we can specify what types of objects are in the ArrayList, by putting the
class name in angle brackets <   >; e.g., "ArrayList<BufferedImage>".
(This is called a "generic" container.) The Oracle API docs detail the methods
provided by ArrayList; some of the most important are as follows
(where "E" indicates the type of thing in the ArrayList):

* `add(E elmt)` - appends element elmt to the end of the list.
* `add(int index, E elmt)` - inserts element elmt at position index.
* `get(int index)` - returns the element at position index.
* `remove(int index)` - removes the element at position index.
* `set(int index, E elmt)` - sets position index to elmt
* `size()` - returns the number of elements in the ArrayList.

## Timers

A simple approach to animation is to periodically update the drawing. What we
need is some way to see when it's time to update, and some way to specify what to
do at that time. This is just another event mechanism &mdash; the event being
the passage of a certain amount of time, and the action being whatever should
happen. So to update all the agents every so often (here 100 milliseconds):

```java
Timer timer = new Timer(100, new AbstractAction("update") {
  public void actionPerformed(ActionEvent e) {
   for (Agent agent: agents) {
    agent.move();
   }
   canvas.repaint();
  }
});
timer.start();
```

The machinery is the same as with the other events, it's just that the event is
one triggered by time passing, rather than a mouse press or something.

There's a new type of loop here, the "for-each", which iterates over all the
objects in a container (like for-in in Python). Note that we still have to declare
the loop variable's type. So here we're saying "for each agent (of type Agent)
in my list of agents, ask it to move itself".

## Subclasses

Different types of Agents move in different ways (they could draw themselves in
different ways, too, but we'll keep that consistent here). This is a good
opportunity to talk about <em>inheritance</em>, the object-oriented way to create
new classes from existing ones. We call the existing class the <em>superclass</em>
and the new class created from it the <em>subclass</em>. With inheritance, each
object of the subclass "inherits" the instance variables and methods of the superclass.
That way, we don't have to write these methods for the subclass unless we want to.
Of course, we'll want to write <em>some</em> methods in the subclass, for if we
don't, the subclass is exactly the same as the superclass and there would have
been no point in creating the subclass. Compared to objects of the superclass,
objects of the subclass have additional specialization.

**The Golden Rule of Inheritance**. If there is one thing you should
remember about inheritance, it is

> **Use inheritance to model "is-a" relationships and only "is-a" relationships.**

What does this mean? Suppose we have two classes: "A" is the superclass of "B"
(which is therefore the subclass). If we have used inheritance correctly, then

1. Every object of class "B" is also an object of class "A".

2. The set of objects of class "B" is a subset of the objects of class "A".

3. Every method that can be called on an object of class "A",
    can also be called on an object of class "B". (However,
    the results of the call may be very different.)

4. Objects of class "B" are like objects of class
    "A", but with additional specialization.


Let's make that more concrete with some agents. The code is [Agents.java](resources/Agents.java).

For example, a "Wanderer" ([Wanderer.java](resources/Wanderer.java)) is an agent who takes a random step:

```java
x += 10 * (Math.random() - 0.5);
y += 10 * (Math.random() - 0.5);
```

A Bouncer ([Bouncer.java](resources/Bouncer.java)) takes a step in a particular
direction (stepping "dx" in the "x" and "dy" in "y"), switching direction if it hits a wall:

```java
x += dx;
if (x > width-r) {
 x = width-r;
 dx = -dx;
}
else if (x < r) {
 x = r;
 dx = -dx;        
}
```

and similarly for "y". (The radius comes in so that it bounces exactly when the
edge hits the wall.)

A WanderingPulsar ([WanderingPulsar.java](resources/WanderingPulsar.java)) is a
wanderer whose radius grows and shrinks too. Thus it extends Wanderer, with some
additional functionality. In particular, its move() method calls the regular
Wanderer move() method, and then pulsates.

Note that any combination of these can be incorporated into the ArrayList as
they are all Agents. They satisfy the "golden rule" in that each of them is-an
Agent (and more).

A subclass can also provide additional methods; for example, a Teleporter
([Teleporter.java](resources/Teleporter.java)) has a method to jump to a new place.
We can't call this method on any old Agent, though &mdash; the method isn't defined
at that level. Thus this works:

```java
Teleporter a = new Teleporter();
a.teleport();
```

but this doesn't:

```java
Agent a = new Teleporter();
a.teleport();
```

It's the same object, but all that the compiler knows is that it's an Agent, and
there's no such method there. The inheritance relationship goes one direction &mdash;
not every Agent is a Teleporter, and thus we can't call the teleport() method on
something if all we know is that it is an Agent. It may be a bit confusing to
realize that a subclass may contain <em>more</em> instance variables and methods
than the superclass, but that's because it's an extended version of the superclass
(the Java keyword helps).

Java does have a mechanism for recognizing that something declared as a superclass
was actually created as a subclass &mdash; type-casting:

```java
Agent a = new Teleporter();
((Teleporter)a).teleport();
```

This runs the risk of a run-time error if in fact "a" was something else. It's
easy to see that here, but it would be harder to see in a more complex situation,
as illustrated in the MouseListener. In that case, it would be preferable to
change the declaration of "agents" to be `ArrayList<Teleporters>` and fill it
only with teleporters (depending on the overall goal, of course).

## Custom rendering

Quick detour before we come back to our agents. We have for the most part just
been placing images on the window. But if you read the docs for
"[Graphics](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/awt/Graphics.html)", you'll
find that you can draw the types of things you'd expect, including ovals (ellipses),
lines, etc., and we used that to put circles for the agents. Now let's make use of
that to render an image ourselves, by drawing shapes for the pixels rather than
just relying on the built-in image drawing method. See [Render.java](resources/Render.java).
The mosaic() method has the usual loops, but steps by a bigger "pixel" size (the
size of the rectangles) and draws rectangles filled the the appropriate color
and outlined in black. The pointillism() method instead just randomly choosing
a bunch of pixel locations, and puts an oval of the appropriate color there.

## Animated images

Now let's combine custom image rendering with animated agents. Basically we have
an agent for each pixel, taking its color from that spot in the image. We then
let it do its thing. The code is [AnimatedImage.java](resources/AnimatedImage.java);
each pixel becomes an agent of the new subclass in
[WanderingPixel.java](resources/WanderingPixel.java). With a lot of agents
wandering around, it's only appropriate for a smaller image like
[baker-200-150.jpg](resources/baker-200-150.jpg). Note that our subclass
extends Wanderer with a color, and thus has its own draw() method that sets the
color before plotting the circle. But the move() method remains from the superclass.

The Timer works the same as before, except that only a random bunch of Agents are
updated, so that not everybody is moving in lock step.

## Java notes 

<dl>
 <dt>generics</dt>
 <dd>When a container object doesn't really care what type of thing it holds, that type can be given as a parameter in angle brackets, e.g., <code>ArrayList&lt;BufferedImage&gt;</code>. Then only objects of that type ("BufferedImage") are in the container, and when we get one, we know its type. You might come across older Java code (pre-generics) that doesn't specify what's in a container, and the object has to be cast upon getting it. That's considered dangerous.</dd>

 <dt>for-each</dt>
 <dd>A special type of loop iterates over members of a collection: " for (member : collection) { }".</dd>

 <dt>extends</dt>
 <dd>This indicates that a class is a subclass of another class, extending its instance variables and methods, and perhaps overriding some of them.</dd>

 <dt>super</dt>
 <dd>Recall from last time that this allows us to treat an object as being of its superclass type, to invoke the superclass constructor or overridden method. Also recall that the no-parameter superclass constructor is called by default but we can choose a different one this way, and that the superclass method is not called unless we explicitly do so.</dd>

 <dt>type cast</dt>
 <dd>We saw this before with numbers; it also work for superclass to subclass when we somehow know that the object referenced by a variable is an instance of the subclass (though the variable is declared as the superclass).</dd>

 <dt>null</dt>
 <dd>This indicates a non-existent object.</dd>
</dl>
