---
layout: page
title: "Java &ndash; Taking a Step Back"
---

## Outline
{:.no_toc}

* Outline
{:toc}

All the code files for today:
[Counter.java](resources/Counter.java),
[CounterDemo.java](resources/CounterDemo.java),
[BasicJavaClass.java](resources/BasicJavaClass.java)

## Announcements

* Short Assignment 1 isn't due until tomorrow (January 9th).

## Finish up from last time

The notes that we will be finishing can be found in [lecture 2](../2/2.html).

## A few topics...

Due to our schedule, we had to jump right in to the image processing code and learn
some Java along the way. The problem so far has been that most of you are new to
Java and we didn't have time in the first couple of days to look at Java in a
more "pure" light; today, we will do just that. Namely, since we've developed
some solid understanding about Java in our first couple of days, we will use our
time today to look at a simple Counter class ([Counter.java](resources/Counter.java))
and come back around and clarify some subtleties that we may have missed,
talk about some general conventions in Java, etc.

### A few thoughts on classes & objects

A good analogy goes a long way in helping us understand some potnentially confusing
concepts:

"...think of a class like a blueprint, and of an object like a house. Defining a class
 does not create an object of that class, just as drawing a blueprint does not
 cause a house to be built. A blueprint says that when we build a house, here's
 what it will be like. And a class says that when we create an object, here are
 the instance variables and methods it will have." -- Scot Drysdale

### Basic program structure (and style)

A few questions have come to me about good programming style and conventions. In
an effort to summarize some of the points I want people to grasp, I created
[BasicJavaClass.java](resources/BasicJavaClass.java). This Java class shows the
typical layout of a Java class, demonstrates various commenting styles, speaks to
naming conventions, etc.

As you read over the file, pay attention to seemingly little things like how I use
consistent indentation (every time you enter into a new "code block," you should
indent; an indent should be the same throughout your files -- e.g., 1 tab == 4 spaces),
consistent naming conventions for variables (all lowercase, words separated with \_)
and methods (camelCase). This is really getting at *style* -- good/consistent code style
helps you when you are debugging (code is easier to read) and it is a great way to make
nice, readable code that your section leader will like, that I will
like, and that your future employer(s) will like! :)

Don't feel compelled to use this "template" but if you do, make sure to:

1. change the name of the class and the file name -- you can do this using Eclipse's
   refactor method (right click on the file > Refactor > Rename...).
2. replace my stub comments with appropriate clients for your class.
3. remove my example methods and instance variables.

### "static"

Snippets from the text:

> "The static modifier in Java can be declared for any variable or method of a class ..."

#### Static variables

> "When a variable of a class is declared as *static*, its value is associated with
the class as a whole, rather than with each individual instance of that class."

Examples of when you might want to do this:

* If you want a variable on a class that keeps track of the number of instances
  of that class that have been created.

* If you have a constant value (a value that never changes) that your class defines.
  The idea here is that each class uses the same value and it is never changed, so
  why have a copy of the variable for each instance?

> "Static variables for a class exist even if no instance of their
class exists."

#### Static methods

> "When a method of a class is declared as *static*, it to is associated (belongs to)
with the class itself, and not with a particular instance of the class. That means
that the method is not invoked on a particular instance of the class using the
traditional dot notation. Instead, it is typically invoked using the name of the class
as a qualifier."

**NOTE:** For the sake of clarity, regarding the above quote, we invoke a static
method on a class by referring to the class name -- which aught to be capitalized --
and use dot notation to then invoke the static method on that class.

Examples:

* `Math.min(2,3);`

* `Math.random();`

* `Math.sqrt(9);`

> "Static methods can be useful for providing utility behaviors related to a class
that need not rely on the state of any particular instance of that class."

### Public and private variables and methods ###

When you declare an instance variable, static variable, or method, you should
declare it as either `public` or `private`.

If a variable is public, then it can be read or written from anywhere in the
program. If a variable is private, then only methods in its class can read or write
it. Most of the time, instance and class variables should be private. That way,
only the methods in the class can see them. That's important from the point of
view of abstraction: code from outside the class should interact with objects in
the class only through the methods.

If a method is public, then it can be called from anywhere in the program. If a
method is private, then only methods in its class can call it. Most of the time,
methods are public. Private methods can be useful, however, especially as "helper"
methods within a class that code from outside the class need not know about.

Later in the course, we'll see another way to declare variables and methods: protected.

**Note:** things are private to the class, not to the object. So one object can see
another object's private variables, if they are in the same class.

### Kinds of variables: local variables, instance variables, class variables ###

Java has three distinct kinds of variables:

* **Instance variables.** The way that an object stores its &quot;personal&quot; data. One copy of each instance variable is created each time an object is created. The object's instance variables continue to exist as long as the object exists.
* **Class variables (also known as static variables).** These belong to the class, not to any particular object. So there is exactly one per class, no matter how many objects of the class there are. These variables exist before any objects are created. They last as long as the program is running. If any object changes the value of a class variable the value is changed for all objects of that class, because there is only one, and it's shared among all the objects in the class.
* **Local variables.** These are &quot;scratch paper&quot; created within a method. A local variable is created when execution reaches the variable's declaration, and it goes away no later than when the method returns. (Actually, when the program reaches the end of the &quot;block&quot; where the variable is declared. Blocks are delimited by curly braces. If you re-enter a block, a new copy of the variable gets created. Any previous value is gone.

Any variable declared within a method is a local variable. Parameters are <em>always</em> local variables for their methods.

If a variable is declared outside a method, then it's either an instance variable
(if the declaration does not include <code>static</code>) or a class variable
(if the declaration includes <code>static</code>).

You might expect there to be declarations like "instance variable" or "local variable".  
Unfortunately, that is not the way it works.  (Show examples from <code>Counter</code>.)

Note that the three variable types are used for very different things.  A common
error is to be writing a method, realize that you need a temporary local variable,
and declare it outside of the method.  This makes it an instance variable, which
remains in existence as long as the object exists.  It runs correctly, but it is
<em>wrong</em> to do this.  It is like realizing you need a piece of scratch paper,
and then going to a file cabinet and creating a new file folder and permanently
filing the piece of scratch paper, which you will never use again.

One other note about variables - any of the three categories can be declared
<code>final</code>.  That means that the variable cannot be changed after it is
assigned.  It is a constant. This can be a very useful thing to do, and allows
you to give meaningful names to "magic values".

While it is legal to declare a final instance variable, does it make sense to do
so?  Not really.  If you have a thousand objects, does each need its own copy
of the constant?  One for the whole class is enough, because it will be the same
for every object in the class.  So if you make an instance variable final, make it
static as well, so it becomes a class variable.

### Primitive types vs. object types ###

One of the biggest changes for Python programmers in moving to Java is that you
have to declare your variables and say what type each will hold. It isn't that
Python didn't have types. It was that Python checked them at run time. Java checks
them statically at compile time rather than at run time. By saving all of those
run time-checks, Java code is able to run significantly faster than Python code.

So what is a type, and what is it for? At the basic level computer memory is a
long sequence of 1's and 0's, each called a bit (BInary digiT). It is broken into
eight bit chunks (called bytes), each with its own address. There are may things
that you might want to store in a computer: numbers, characters, colors, sounds,
wildebeast objects, etc. Even computer instructions are stored in memory. Each "type"
of thing has its own encoding as bits. When I was teaching the computer architecture
course one of my favorite test questions was to give a 32 bit sequence of 0's
and 1's and ask how it would be interpreted if it were a computer instruction,
an integer, a string of characters, a color, etc.

When programming in machine language the programmer has to remember what each
byte is supposed to represent. If he or she starts treating computer instructions
as if they were integers, or integers as if they were computer instructions, bad
things happen. (That is what many computer viruses do. They store a bit pattern
as data, and then trick the program into running that pattern as code.)

The two things that a type tells us are

1. How to interpret the bits as a representation of the particular data.

2. Which operations are valid on that data.

Smalltalk, an early OO language, has a very elegant solution to the type problem.
Everything is an object, and the operations that are valid on the object are
precisely those defined by its methods. The methods understand how to interpret
the bit patterns. It is elegant, but having to ask a number to add itself to
another number via a method call is a lot slower than using the hardware "add"
instruction. As a result, Smalltalk is s-l-o-w.

Java compromises. Most things are objects whose types are defined by the methods
that they implement and the data that they store. The object data is stored
somewhere in memory, and variables hold references to the object that tell how
to find it. The variables c1 and c2 in the Counter class are examples. In practice
the reference is a memory address, but Java treats the reference abstractly and
uses it to communicate with the object. (Unlike C and C++, Java has no way to
manipulate the memory addresses.) All references in Java are the same size, no
matter how many instance variables and methods the object has.

For speed's sake, Java has eight primitive types that are not objects:

* Four types for storing integers of in different numbers of bytes: <code>byte</code> (1),
  <code>short</code> (2), <code>int</code> (4), and <code>long</code> (8). We will
  almost always use <code>int</code>, which has a range between just under negative
  2 billion and to just over 2 billion. (That's because an <code>int</code> has
  32 bits. In 32 bits, we can store all integers in the range <span class="math"> - 2<sup>31</sup></span>
  to <span class="math">2<sup>31</sup> - 1</span>, and \\(2^{31} = 2,147,483,648\\).)
  <code>byte</code> is -128 to 127. <code>short</code> is basically plus or minus 32,000
  (\\(2^{15} = 32,768\\). <code>long</code> is huge: <span class="math"> - 2<sup>63</sup></span>
  to <span class="math">2<sup>63</sup> - 1</span>, and \\(2^{63} = 9,223,372,036,854,775,808\\).
* Two types for storing numbers with fractions in scientific notation: <code>float</code>
  (4 bytes) and <code>double</code> (8 bytes). <code>float</code> has 7 or 8 significant
  decimal digits, <code>double</code> has about 15 significant decimal digits.
* <code>char</code>, a type for storing characters in a system called Unicode (2 bytes).
* <code>boolean</code>, which stores <code>true</code> or <code>false</code>.

Values of a primitive type are actually stored in the variable itself, and so
these primitives have different lengths in memory. Therefore, Java has two kinds
of variables. If a variable is of a primitive type, the variable contains the
actual data itself (the bit pattern representing the data). If a variable is of
type reference to an object, then it contains a reference, and the data itself
is stored elsewhere.

Why is this distinction important? My wife and I have a joint checking account.
e each have an ATM card. The cards are different and have different names on them,
but the refer to the same checking account. If I withdraw money with my ATM card,
there is less money in the account, and if my wife then looks at the balance it
will be smaller even though she did nothing with her ATM card.

In this analogy, the account is the object (and bank account objects are a common
example in textbooks). The ATM cards are the variables, each holding a reference
to the same account. Any changes made by either of us to the account via our ATM
card are seen by both. On the other hand, if my wife has her ATM card re-programmed
so that it refers to her personal account (changes the reference stored in the
variable), that won't affect my card or the account. She just will no longer be
able to use that ATM card to withdraw money from our joint account, because it
no longer refers to our joint account.

#### Some tricky details
*Some selected demonstrations were shown in class.*

* As in Python and C, when you divide two integer types, you get integer division, which truncates the result so <code>11/3 = 3</code>.  % is the remainder operation.  
<code>11%3 = 2</code>.  ONLY for integers.
* Integer literals (e.g., <code>123</code>) are assumed to be of type <code>int</code>, unless followed by a <code>L</code> or <code>l</code>, in which case they are <code>long</code>.
* Floating-point literals (e.g., 3.14159) contain a decimal point and are assumed to be <code>double</code>, unless followed by an <code>F</code> or <code>f</code>, in which case they are <code>float</code>. The scientific notation form that you've seen in Python or C works in Java, too, e.g., <code>6.02e23</code>. <code>E</code> or <code>e</code> means &quot;10 to the&quot;.
* As in C, character literals are written between single quotes, e.g., <code>'a'</code>. Pythonistas: Python does not have single-character variables or literals. In Python, <code>'a'</code> is a <em>string</em> consisting of one character, but in Java it's a <em>character literal</em>, which is a different type from a string. As in C and Python, <code>'2'</code> means the <em>character</em> 2, not the integer 2.
* As in C and Python, use the backslash as an escape character. For a character literal that's a single quote: <code>'\''</code>. For a backslash: <code>'\\'</code>. And <code>'\n'</code> is the newline character, with <code>'\t'</code> being the tab character.
* In Java, a <code>String</code> is an object rather than a primitive type. String literals are surrounded by double quotes: <code>&quot;This is a   string&quot;</code>. Strings can be concatenated using the <code>+</code> operator. To include a double-quote in a string, escape it with backslash: <code>&quot;Strings are enclosed by \&quot; characters&quot;</code>. String literals cannot extend over multiple lines. If your String literal is that long, break it into pieces on separate lines and use the <code>+</code> operator to concatenate them.
* Java has <strong>type conversions</strong>. Some happen automatically. Others must be specifically requested via a process called <strong>casting</strong>. The distinction is whether the conversion can result in the loss of significant information. If an <code>int</code> is used where a <code>double</code> is expected, it is safe to do the conversion and it happens automatically. (Every <code>int</code> can also be represented as a <code>double</code>.) If a <code>double</code> is used where an <code>int</code> is expected, we have a problem. There is no good integer representation for 3.3, for instance. So we have to make a specific cast, which truncates the fractional part. You cast by putting the desired type name in parentheses to the left of the expression being cast:
```java
double d = 3.3;
int n = (int) d;
```
Going in the &quot;safe&quot; direction is called <strong>widening</strong>; going the other way is called <strong>narrowing</strong>.
The order of primitive types from narrowest to widest is
```
byte => short => int => long => float => double
```
It is also widening to go from a <code>char</code> to a <code>short</code>, an <code>int</code>, or a <code>double</code>, because the Unicode in a <code>char</code> is stored as an integer value.

### Equality for all (== vs. .equals())

The function `.equals()` checks the actual contents of objects being compared,
whereas the `==` operator checks whether the references to the objects are equal.

### A remark on abstraction & Counter.java

I said that abstraction is an important concept. How does it play into this example? Because
all the instance variables of a <code>Counter</code> object are private, no code from outside
the <code>Counter</code> class can access them. The <em>only</em> way to interact with a
<code>Counter</code> is by calling its methods. The caller knows <em>what</em> the methods
do, but not <em>how</em> it does them. Granted, the implementations of the <code>tick</code>,
<code>set</code>, <code>reset</code>, and <code>getValue</code> methods are pretty obvious,
but the <code>toString</code> method could have been implemented in several different ways.
The caller cares not. As long as the methods do what they're supposed to do, the caller should
be happy.
