---
layout: page
title: "ADTs: List – Interfaces & Arrays"
---

## Outline
{:.no_toc}

* Outline
{:toc}

All the code files for today:
[GrowingArray.java](resources/GrowingArray.java) |
[ListTest.java](resources/ListTest.java) |
[SimpleList.java](resources/SimpleList.java) |
[SinglyLinked.java](resources/SinglyLinked.java)

## "How do I learn Data Structures and Algorithms?"

* [Read this post](http://www.quora.com/How-do-I-learn-Data-Structures-and-Algorithms-2)
  &mdash; a response by a software engineer at Google. (Notice that we've now been
  exposed to lots of these things!)
* Basically...take this class :)

<a href="../9/9.html">Finishing up from last time...</a>

## Defining an ADT: inheritance vs. interfaces

We explored inheritance with animated agents, and have also used it in a number
of other classes, e.g., shapes, threads, java frames and components, etc. Recall
that inheritance is used to say that a new subclass "is-a" superclass, plus more
stuff / with more specific behaviors. Inheritance captures similarities among classes,
in that we can use a subclass in any context where we can use its superclass (but
not the other way around).

A related, but different, way to capture similarities is with an <em>interface</em>.
An interface just specifies a bunch of method headers (name, return type, parameters),
but without bodies implementing them. So that's actually ideal for specifying an
ADT. The interface gives the collection of operations supported by the ADT, without
specifying the data representation. A very basic interface for lists: [SimpleList.java](resources/SimpleList.java).
We say what a list can do, but not how it does it. In fact, we'll see below two
different ways how (among many others).

So why would we ever want inheritance instead of an interface? One good reason is
if there is some common data or method implementations. An example is Shape, from
the graphical editor. There, I decided that all shapes should be defined in terms
of two corners, and thus could share a common implementation for moving. (Similarly
with colors.) I could have instead just given a shape interface, leaving the
implementation unspecified. Then the various subclasses would have the freedom
to be represented however they wanted to, but at the same time would have the
obligation to implement the move operation themselves. For this set of shapes,
that would have led to redundancies as they all work the same way; for a more
complex case, the trade off might have been better the other way.

You might have noticed that I actually used the keyword "abstract" in defining
the Shape class. That means that no objects of that class can directly be created
("new"ed); only objects of non-abstract subclasses. Since I don't know how to
draw or compute containment of an unspecified shape, that makes sense. I also
abeled those methods as "abstract", so that any non-abstract subclass is required
to implement them.

So why would we ever want an interface instead of inheritance? Inheritance can
lead to some tricky and ambiguous scenarios. This is particularly true if a class
inherits from multiple superclasses, which happen to have different instance variables
with the same name or different implementations of a method with the same name.
Which one is meant when? (Esp. if they're called from other objects.) For that
reason, Java forbids multiple inheritance; a class can only extend one superclass.
It can, however, implement multiple interfaces. There's no ambiguity there &mdash;
the class provides its own implementation of each method, and doesn't rely on
existing (potentially conflicting) implementations that it inherits.

An "implements" tag in the subclass definition is a promise to implement all the
methods of the interface (analogous to "extends"). Thus, as we saw with inheritance,
we can declare a variable to be of the interface type, and not worry about which
concrete implementation it is. An example using our list interface: [ListTest.java](resources/ListTest.java).
The class may of course also include more methods beyond those of the interface,
including some that only it defines, or that help it satisfy other interfaces.

## Growing array list implementation

Now for a completely different way to implement that same interface, let's use an
array. As you'll recall, an array is given a fixed length when its created, and
we can only us elements up to that length minus 1 (since we start counting at 0).
But our <a href="resources/SimpleList.java">SimpleList.java</a> interface lets us
add to the end of the list (using an index of size()). So how can we implement
that interface with a fixed-size array? The trick is to grow the array when we run
out of room. Actually, we can't grow the array, but we can create a new one (say
of double the size) and copy over the elements.

Our implementation: <a href="resources/GrowingArray.java">GrowingArray.java</a>. We
simply use the underlying array for get() and set(), and a loop for toString(). In
addition to the array, we keep a variable "size" that says how many elements are
actually filled in. We can then compare that to the actual length of the array
(array.length, a variable not a method) and allocate and copy over if needed.

Add() and remove() may also require some element shifting. If we are adding in
the middle of the array, we need to shift things after it to the right by one
index, in order to make room. Likewise, if we are removing in the middle of the
array, we shift things after it to the left by one step, in order to fill in the
hole it would leave behind. Note the order of the loops: from right to left for
add vs. from left to right for remove. Step through it.

## Java notes

<dl>

<dt>interface</dt>
<dd>An interface specifies a set of methods, but no instance variables, and does not provide implementations for those methods.  When a class "implement"s an interface, it must provide all the method implementations.</dd>

</dl>
